                                      Warramiri Yolŋu cosmology: an introduction | Ben van Gelderen, Kathy (Gotha) Guthadjaka,
                   Linda Ford, James Walun Bukulatjpi, Chloe Ford, Emily Ford, Bettina Danganbarr, Pawinee Yuhun and Ruth Wallace


56
                        Warramiri Yolŋu cosmology: an introduction

                      Ben van Gelderen                                          Kathy (Gotha) Guthadjaka

            College of Education, Charles Darwin                      Northern Institute, Charles Darwin University
                         University
                                                                              kathy.guthadjaka@cdu.edu.au
             bvangelderen@nungalinya.edu.au

                          Linda Ford                                             James Wäluŋ Bukulatjpi

        Northern Institute, Charles Darwin University                                  Warramirri Elder

                    linda.ford@cdu.edu.au

                          Chloe Ford                                                      Emily Ford

        Northern Institute, Charles Darwin University                 Northern Institute, Charles Darwin University

                   chloe.ford@cdu.edu.au                                           emily.ford@cdu.edu.au

                     Bettina Danganbarr                                                Pawinee Yuhun

               danganbarr.bettina@gmail.com                           Northern Institute, Charles Darwin University

                                                                               pawinee.yuhun@cdu.edu.au

                                                         Ruth Wallace

                                      Northern Institute, Charles Darwin University

                                                  ruth.wallace@cdu.edu.au


     Keywords: Indigenous cosmology; Warramiri Yolŋu; ‘Bothways’ philosophy; Gäwa


     Introduction
     Even within the western academic tradition, cosmology is a complex and contested domain; fields
     of science, philosophy and anthropology all utilise the term in particular ways, to highlight specific
     concerns. Interactions with Indigenous cosmological theories and practices further stretch and challenge
     any attempt at an inclusive definition. For present purposes, we have positioned this introduction to
     Warramiri Yolŋu cosmology in the metaphysical realm of definitions, interacting with systems of ontology
     (reality, what/how of existence), epistemology (truth, what/how of knowing) and axiology (ethics, what/
     how of value). Regarding Indigenous cosmologies, Keen offers a helpful distinction: ‘‘Cosmology’ means
     the body of concepts and doctrines about the origins and properties of the world and its inhabitants.
     ‘Cosmogony’ refers specifically to doctrines about the origins of things’ (Keen, 2004, p. 210). Whilst
     clarifying the definitional sphere of the term for this paper, it becomes readily apparent that cosmology is
     still a very broad concept, covering the origin of all matter and its inherent properties and relationships.
     By this understanding, almost all ethnographic terms utilised by twentieth century Balanda (white)
     researchers such as kinship, creation ‘mythology’, totemism etc. can potentially be incorporated into a
     discussion of Aboriginal cosmology. However, this paper is located within a specific research project,
     namely ‘Aboriginal Cosmology: what this means for women and gender public policy1’ and functions as
     both an initial literature review for the project and a forerunner for the methodological principles pursued
     throughout. Furthermore, to ensure meaningful, generative outcomes, the small Warramiri community at
     Gäwa was chosen to situate the research project, thus very broad issues of cosmology have been given
     a specific locale as a focus. Overall, in honouring the commitment to transdisciplinary and ‘bothways’
     1 	    Australian Research Council Discovery Indigenous Programme funding code (IN170100020).
                                                                              Learning Communities | Number 24 – October 2019



                                                                                                                       57
research methodologies in Yolŋu communities, we focus on local perspectives and narratives from the
homeland community at Gäwa to outline an introduction to Warramiri cosmology.


Methodology

       For a Balanda who can only learn from books, this is not enough. They can’t get the real
       meaning of Yolngu life from books because the social and religious aspect of life is so
       diverse, that sometimes, we can only learn about one side of the story, or one aspect of the
       Yolngu ontology, but there are other areas, so diverse, that all fit in one whole universe…
       (Anthropologists) had the privilege of learning about our life. But they wrote it down and
       recorded it as if it were from a fairytale, as if it were dead… (and) presented the knowledge
       in a box, like a coffin with the name “dreaming” on it. It was like a dead corpse in a box
       delivered to the wider society. (Marika-Munuŋgiritj, 1991, p. 22, 24)

This significant quote from renowned Yolŋu educator and philosopher, Marika-Munuŋgiritj, raises
immediate methodological challenges for our introduction to Warramiri cosmology. Firstly, many of the
‘classic’ texts which have engaged with Yolŋu cosmology and could inform this paper, are the specific
anthropological works she critiques. Secondly, she squarely raises the question of whether there is any
value for Balanda in such literature informed introductions; ‘they can’t get the real meaning of Yolngu
life from books’. Lastly, she alludes to the difficulty of comprehending the Yolŋu cosmos overall, the
interconnectedness of the various elements necessitating a holistic (and therefore detailed and lengthy)
approach. Indeed, Rudder, who spent decades living and learning at Galiwin’ku, reflected that ‘it is
extremely difficult if not impossible to take any single element of the Yolŋu cosmos and examine it in
isolation. No part of the cosmos exists in isolation but all are related in many directions to other parts.
Each specific identified element becomes the focus of a set of relationships which links other elements
as part of the overall network; each of these in turn links to other elements and this pattern of interrelated
elements continues without boundaries or limits’ (Rudder, 1993, p. 26). Nevertheless, we believe that
some form of basic introduction to the history and cosmology of the Warramiri will enable the Balanda
members of the research team to best analyse and apply their understanding for positive outcomes
in relation to gender, women and public policy, which is the ultimate focus of the project. Indeed, as
Marika-Munuŋgiritj advises in the same work, Balanda researchers should use ‘their learning to help
Yolngu in their battle for cultural survival… (to) provide help for the future development of Yolngu’
(Marika-Munuŋgiritj, 1991, p. 25), and we believe that an appropriate literature review should facilitate
this priority. However, the question remains; how to conduct a literature review that engages with the
inherent challenges outlined above? In this regard we argue that an appropriation of some elements of
the ‘bothways’ educational philosophy and the transdisciplinary and generative research methodologies
as developed by Christie and associates at Charles Darwin University with Yolŋu collaborators over
many years is highly appropriate2. Indeed, as has been noted in relation to Yolŋu research methodology
from a community development project at Galiwin’ku, that ‘the act is primary, whether it be gardening,
or talking about a garden… there is no difference between the correct ways to do negotiation, and the
correct ways to do gardens’ (Christie, 2013b, p. 52), then, we argue, ‘doing a literature review’ should
attempt to also follow these ‘correct ways’, as possible. Thus, some of the guiding principles for our
‘bothways’ literature review have been modelled on key themes from long-standing collaborations with
Yolŋu researchers and are summarized in brief:

       - Foreground the local, Warramiri perspective. In particular, we utilise extensive quotes to retain
       the specific language and imagery utilised by Warramiri Elders, if possible in Warramiri language
       itself; ‘sticking to your own language is a sign that you are taking your ancestral responsibilities
       seriously and can speak on behalf of land’ (Christie, 2013b, p. 47).
       - Avoid generalising, even with regard to an overall Yolŋu cosmology, as ‘every Yolngu claims

2 	    Significant multi-year research projects such as ‘Indigenous Knowledge Traditions, and Digital technology’
(http://www.cdu.edu.au/centres/ik/ikhome.html), ‘Teaching from Country’
(http://learnline.cdu.edu.au/inc/tfc/index.html) and ‘ICT and Capacity Building in Remote Communities’
(http://www.cdu.edu.au/centres/inc/) all directly involved Yolŋu co-researchers and Guthadjaka specifically.
                                      Warramiri Yolŋu cosmology: an introduction | Ben van Gelderen, Kathy (Gotha) Guthadjaka,
                   Linda Ford, James Walun Bukulatjpi, Chloe Ford, Emily Ford, Bettina Danganbarr, Pawinee Yuhun and Ruth Wallace


58
           and celebrates their identity through (their) land-based language and culture complexes... you
           can only tell your own story...(with a) focus on particular themes, concepts, viewpoints etc., at the
           expense of others’ (Christie, 2004, p. 5). In fact, the aim is to build ‘shared understandings around
           particular cases, rather than a general theory of what’s going on… the ambiguity of the situation
           may help everyone to rethink or renew’ (Christie, 2013, p. 10).
           - As alluded to above, the review should be part of a ground-up, generative process, ‘we are
           activists, and as such our work is useless if it does not address the public problems of people’s
           life ways’ (Christie, 2013, p. 11). In this case, the substantive project analysing and advocating for
           quality public policy in regards to women and gender issues is the rationale for the review.
           - Reject notions of ‘epistemic equality’ as Yolŋu dismiss ‘the idea that anyone can potentially know
           anything, and everyone knows in the same way…they also rejected the assumption that everyone
           does or can know the same things in the same way’ (Christie, 2013b, p. 49). In this instance,
           although Warramiri Elders at Gäwa routinely involve all community members in decisions (e.g.,
           Guthadjaka, 2012), as ‘each participant occupies an expert opinion… and communication entails
           building shared understandings among positions’ (Christie, 2008, p. 41), the Elders themselves
           assume the role of speaking on behalf of the community and are the ones quoted.
           - Maintain, where possible, a narrative focus because ‘beginning with a story plunges us to the
           core of the work involved in philosophy and dialogue, already enmeshed in detail’ (Verran &
           Christie, 2011, p. 24).
           - Overall, explicitly acknowledge that the ‘transdisciplinary’ nature of Indigenous research will
           provide only partial satisfaction to either party’s knowledge traditions. Particularly, ‘non-Indigenous
           academics must guard against any attempt to exhaustively define Indigenous research (for to do
           so would in itself be an act of colonisation or appropriation) or to claim all its results. We can never
           know fully’ (Christie, 2006, p. 80).
     Thus, we will not attempt to categorize Warramiri Yolŋu cosmology by topics (time, space, birth,
     relationships, death etc.) nor will we focus on cosmogony narratives per se, but will foreground (largely
     unpublished) conference presentations and formal speeches by Elder Guthadjaka and/or local Gäwa
     and Galiwin’ku narratives which shed light on Warramiri metaphysical foundations. Below are assembled
     a number of stories and texts which form the basis of the paper. Support from reflections from past
     Warramiri Elders, such as Burrumarra (already in the public domain), will also be considered, and
     previous studies (by Yolŋu and Balanda) which have engaged with Yolŋu metaphysical categories will
     be referred to in a ‘bothways’ fashion. Our ultimate hope is that out of the interplay of these sources, new
     understanding may emerge: ‘our experiences may not provide many take-home messages for others in
     similar contexts beyond those they know themselves. They may however strengthen the resolve to work
     on research truth and method as both fundamentally local’ (Christie, 2009, p. 33).


     Context and positionality
     Compared to many Yolŋu clans, there is a significant body of work on the specific cosmology of the
     Warramiri; the yirritja clan of the coral reef and the deep sea (Burrumarra, 1977).
                                                                            Learning Communities | Number 24 – October 2019



                                                                                                                      59
Figure 1. The many faces of David Burrumarra




Drawing by Julia Blackburn

This is almost exclusively due to the charismatic figure of David Burrumarra. In a lifetime spanning pre-
Mission contact, all the way through to the 1990s debates on reconciliation and republicanism (McIntosh,
1994), Burrumarra contributed heavily to the incredible transformation of Yolŋu society in this period. It is
well acknowledged that his life and work ‘had a marked impact on the history of Arnhem Land’ (Williams,
1994, p. 121). Furthermore, he actively courted anthropologists, linguists, missionaries, teachers and
psychologists in a concerted attempt to both understand the new Balanda culture and, crucially, to help
Balanda understand and appreciate Yolŋu. Throughout this process he organised for much sacred/
secret ‘inside’ knowledge of Warramiri to be made available to the general public. These were often
highly controversial moments, and Burrumarra’s initiatives (reflections on identity) serve as integrated
exemplars of a Warramiri cosmology, outlining the Warramiri belief that they, amongst the existing yirritja
clans ‘have a mandate for mediating relations with outsiders’ (McIntosh, 1997, p. 43); of negotiating the
interplay between traditional cosmology and public policy directives.

Burrumarra’s ‘vision of the future in which the world will be as it was, but with Aborigines having all
the conveniences of the twentieth century’ (McIntosh, 1994, p. 27) including access to and learning
of traditional Warramiri land and culture, bilingual education and Christianity simultaneously, was
just becoming realised at the time of his passing. For, around the same time, Guthadjaka, following
the instructions of her clan-father, and supported by various kinship relations began the process of
establishing Gäwa homeland, a significant Warramiri ancestral estate on the tip of Elcho Island, as
a settled community. It is an inspiring narrative of practical perseverance, resilience and partnership
(Baker, Garŋgulkpuy & Guthadjaka, 2014; Nungalinya, 2017). As of 2018, Gäwa community is well
established, with its own permanantly staffed school (Gäwa Christian School), (mostly) all-weather road,
airstrip, barge landing and registered Aboriginal Corporation to support micro-enterprise development. In
the educational sphere in particular, Guthadjaka readily acknowledges that she has continued the work
of Burrumarra (‘we all have leaders and my leader was David Burrumarra’; Guthadjaka, 2018c) through
both sharing Warramiri cosmological foundations and leveraging support from educational instuitions
and organisations who share like-minded goals to enhance the Gäwa community. She has recently
been recognized3 for decades of contribution to community development at Galiwin’ku and Gäwa, and
3 	     Guthadjaka (Gotha) is the Senior Australian of the Year, for the Northern Territory, was awarded an MBE for
services to education and community development and an honorary doctorate from Charles Darwin University, all in
2018.
                                      Warramiri Yolŋu cosmology: an introduction | Ben van Gelderen, Kathy (Gotha) Guthadjaka,
                   Linda Ford, James Walun Bukulatjpi, Chloe Ford, Emily Ford, Bettina Danganbarr, Pawinee Yuhun and Ruth Wallace


60
     in education explicitly, for elucidating bilingual and intercultural, Warramiri cosmological implications for
     policy and practices. It is a number of her formal presentations and speeches in receiving these accolades
     that we draw upon. Building on Burrumarra’s theorizing, she has also shared various ‘metaphors’ to
     outline the foundation of negotiated balance and mutual progress between pairings such as community-
     school, teacher-student, English-Warramiri. These include key concepts such as lonydju’yirr (being side-
     by-side), rrambaŋi marŋgithirr (together learning) and gumurrkunhamirr (establishing relationship) which
     have been analysed elsewhere (van Gelderen & Guthadjaka, 2019a).

     Ben van Gelderen lived and worked at Gäwa and was inculcated into the Warramiri ‘bothways’ educational
     philosophy through team-teaching with Guthadjaka. Throughout the last decade they have collaborated
     in designing the Warramiri website to house digital resources for the transmission of traditional Warramiri
     language and culture, and have co-authored a number of presentations/papers based on community
     research at Gäwa on homeland ‘on country’ education and ‘bothways’ approaches (van Gelderen &
     Guthadjaka, 2019b). Ben was adopted into the gurruṯu kinship system as Guthadjaka’s son, and believes
     this was highly strategic. It established him as a ‘caretaker’ for Warramiri interests at Gäwa, but without
     any direct land affirming rights, positioned him to listen, learn and respect Guthadjaka’s perspective,
     and most importantly, allowed him the freedom of a ‘child’ to ask simple questions when he should
     know better by now! In short, although Ben still feels inadequate to understand and convey Warramiri
     cosmology, he is confident, after a number of years of iterative conversations and interactions, that he (in
     conjunction with the co-authors) can assist in structuring Warramiri sharings for other interested Balanda
     to be introduced and better appreciate the Warramiri cosmology.


     Land axiology
     Guthadjaka’s first published academic text emanated from her work with the ‘Teaching from Country’
     program. In a summary session for the initiative, she shared her understanding of the vital connection to
     country in a child’s growth into identity. Some excerpts:

      Ga manymak. Ŋayi ŋuli djamarrkuli Yolŋunydja                Okay. So, when the Yolŋu children learn on
      ŋunhaldja wäŋaŋur ga marŋgithirr, ŋayi                      country, they are safe inside themselves, and
      dhu djinawan’ ŋunhal nhanŋu mulka’yirr ga                   confident to go forward.
      marrparaŋdhirr ŋayi dhu marrtji.
      Ŋunhi nhakun walal marŋgi, wäŋaw, wäŋaw                     So you see, they know the land, they know the
      walal marŋgi, ga wataw, ga gapuw, nhätha dhu                land and the breezes, and the water, what time
      ŋurruthirri, ga nhätha dhu raŋithirr, bili wäŋaŋur          the tide will be in, when it will be out, because
      walal ga marŋgithirr ŋunhili banydji, ga ŋayiny             they are learning on country, and he grows with
      marrtji walalaŋ ŋuthan ŋuruŋiyi marŋgithinyaray.            them, by means of that learning.
      Ga dhuwandja nhakun Balanda teaching, ga                    But in Balanda teaching, they are sitting in the
      dhiyala yaŋara’ŋur gapuŋur walal ga nhina,                  water tributary, and getting education from there,
      ga dhipuŋur walal ga educationdja märram,                   just from the one source, like it’s the Balanda
      waŋgany yän, dhipuŋur bili, dhuwal gapu, nhakun             spring flowing here, so they just get a little trickle,
      dhuwandja Balandaw gapu maŋutji, dhuwal ga                  not a full stream, they get a little knowledge.
      marrtjiny ga walalndyja ga dhiyala djurryurr gapu
      yaka full gapu, nyumukuniny walal ga märram,
      marŋgikunhawuy.
      Ŋunhi one nhawi picture, ga dhuwal rrakal dhäwu             That’s one picture, and here is a story given to
      gurrupan waŋganydhu old man Mäpuru’ŋur                      me by one old man from Mäpuru, from around
      ŋayi ga dhäwu lakaram, dhuwandja nhakun                     there are hills there, with the mists and spider’s
      buku’u wäŋa, ga wakuluŋgul ŋayi dhiyal nhina                webs, and the water goes to there, and then the
      malany, gädany, ga gapu ŋayi marrtji dhipal, bala           water comes out from here.
      dhawatthurr ŋayi ga gapu dhipuŋurdja.
                                                                        Learning Communities | Number 24 – October 2019



                                                                                                                 61
 Raypiny gapu bala wanawanany ŋayi li djäma            Making fresh water in all the little branches
 dhuwal ŋunhi dhipal bäpurruw marrtji gapu,            belonging to the various clan groups, to there,
 ga dhuwal dhipal, dhuwal dhipal, bala ŋayi ga         and continuing on, to there, and they meet, the
 continue marrtjin badaknha yän, ga dhiyaldja,         fresh and the salt water. That’s it.
 bala manda ga gumurr-bunanhamirr raypiny
 gapu, ga damurruŋ’ gapu. Dhuwandja.                   They meet, and those different tribes receive
                                                       learning, this one and this one and this one,
 Bala gumurr-bunanhamirr, ga                           Yes, all the different Yirritja waters, like for the
 marŋgikunhawuydja ga dhiyaŋ bäpurruy märram,          Madarrpa people, the Warramiri, the Gandaŋu,
 ga dhiyaŋ, ga dhiyaŋ, dhiyaŋ gäna’kana,               Meliway, many many clan groups, they get water
 warrpam’ muka gapu dhuwal Yirritja walalaŋ            from here, not just one water.
 wäŋa, balanya nhakun Madarrpa, Warramiri,
 nhawi Gandaŋu malany, Meliway, dharrwa          So, the water runs, and at the sea, it places its
 dharrwa bäpurru’ malany, walal ga gapu dhipuŋur feet down. Standing with its foundation.
 märram, yaka yän waŋgany gapu.

 Ga wandirri ŋayi li ŋunhi gapuny, damurruŋ’ŋurdja
 bala ŋayi li ŋunhi luku-nhirrpana ŋunhiliyi.
 Djalkirimirra dhärran ga nhakun.
 Ŋunhi ŋurruŋun bittja ŋarra milkuŋal, ŋunhi           But that picture I showed you before, the students
 djalkirimiriw. Dhiyal gan ŋäthinyamirr yolŋu’yulŋu.   are without foundations. Crying there to each
 Balanya nhakun ŋunhi scriptureŋur ga lakaram,         other, just like the scriptures say; ‘By the rivers of
 ‘By the rivers of Babylon’, ŋunhiyi ga teaching       Babylon’, getting the teaching, when they were
 märram, ŋunhi walal ga ŋäthinyamirri walal ŋayi       crying together, and the government says:
 dhu gapman’thu bitjan waŋa-
                                                       ‘Okay, give us a story’.
 ‘Ma’ dhäwu napurruŋ gurrupul!’

 Ga walaldja ŋuli waŋan djamarrkuliny, ‘Nhaltjan       And the children say: ‘How can we sing a song
 napurr dhu dar’taryun wäŋaŋurnydja, nhawi             in this place, here singing in a strange land, we
 manikaynydja, dhuwandja napurr ga mulkuruŋur          can’t sing or tell a story or teach, because that
 wäŋaŋur dar’taryundja, nhawi nhinan, bäyŋu            law of the (Balanda) water has taken it.’
 napurr dhu dar’taryun wo dhäwu lakaram, wo
 marŋgikum, bili ŋuruŋiyi ŋayi romdhu djaw’yurr
 gapuy.’
(Guthadjaka, 2010, p. 26-29).

In 2013, as part of community research into the ‘bothways’ philosophy of education at Gäwa, Guthadjaka
also shared a re-working of the classic ‘Djuranydjura’ tale concerning ‘Macassans’ visiting Yolŋu lands
for trade.

      This is the Djuranydjura story; the Macassans came here and built their houses and they
      said: ‘Do you want blankets?

      ‘No, I have paperbark’

      ‘Do you want some shoes?’

      ‘No, I have my feet.’

      ‘Do you want rice?’

      ‘There is food for me in the bush. I am looking after the land, so the land will take care of
      me’.
                                       Warramiri Yolŋu cosmology: an introduction | Ben van Gelderen, Kathy (Gotha) Guthadjaka,
                    Linda Ford, James Walun Bukulatjpi, Chloe Ford, Emily Ford, Bettina Danganbarr, Pawinee Yuhun and Ruth Wallace


62
            There are many Djuranydjura stories, Macassan stories. Like the Balanda, as they come
            in, their thinking is to build something here, in the Yolŋu community. But they don’t ask first
            “What do you need?” It’s just like they are bringing new ideas, from the ‘mainstream’. And
            they end up failing, feeling bad, packing up their things and leaving. And they leave because
            they had come with their own thinking. And here, when Balanda come into the school with a
            new law, they need to talk backwards and forwards, bring ‘both ways’ communication first.
            And then we can move together.

            And s/he changed language there (at Ṉaŋinyburra homeland, next to Gäwa) from Gupapuyŋu
            to Warramiri because of the breeze. S/he said: ‘I’m going to stay here at Ṉaŋinyburra
            because it was the wind that brought me this way’... Yes, we need the wind of the Spirit as
            a cleansing for us. (van Gelderen & Guthadjaka, 2019a, p. 252)

     Space does not permit a detailed analysis of Guthadjaka’s sharings, and we wish for them to speak for
     themselves. However, at the broad level, it is clear that a profound educational philosophy is espoused,
     that a foundation for all learning is being situated upon one’s ancestral estates; an ‘on country’ and
     ‘through country’ homeland fundamental. It is interesting to note that this focus is contrasted to Balanda
     practices of only receiving a ‘trickle’ of knowledge, inside the classroom walls, compared to exposure
     to the full streams which stem from traditional interactions of the various Yolŋu clans. This theme of
     the deep sea Warramiri water and the complex interactions with the fresh water’s journey has also
     been outlined further in terms of cosmological lessons for conflict resolution and governance among
     Yolŋu clans (Guthadjaka, 2015). Furthermore, from the Djuranydjura narrative we learn of the reciprocal
     relationship with such ancestral estates (I am looking after the land, so the land will take care of me),
     and that there is an expectation that Balanda will enter into some of the same kind of negotiation and
     balancing of priorities (need to talk backwards and forwards, bring ‘both ways’ communication first)
     that is characteristic of Warramiri agreement making. Suffice it to say, the story of Gäwa and the local
     school situated there is a living embodiment of the pre-eminence of land (and sea) in the Warramiri
     axiology; the value and ‘rightness’ of caring for it, of learning on and through it and of learning from it for
     other interpersonal and interclan relationships. In this regard, there are strong parallels with the work
     of Marika-Munuŋgiritj who centres her ‘Yolngu Djalkiri Cosmology’ (Marika-Munuŋgiritj, 1991, p. 20) on
     the image of djalkiri, which ‘literally means foot or footprint, but it symbolises the foundation, where the
     human being actually comes into contact with the land, his or her environment. The hidden meaning is
     our core, or foundation’ (Marika-Munuŋgiritj, 1991, p. 18). Indeed, her words resonate with Guthadjaka’s:

            From the Yolngu perspective of the land we learn from the start of its fundamental importance
            and how we learn to value the land for the abstract, deep and common knowledge that is
            derived from the land, giving us meaning and identity. The spiritual, religious and social
            order of connectedness to the land gives us meaning and identity through the knowledge
            of understanding everything that is linked to one another. (Marika-Munuŋgiritj, 1991, p. 22)

     In line with the methodological framework pursued, we now broaden out the lens to incorporate other
     Yolŋu and Balanda theorists. Many of Burrumarra’s initiatives had as their foundation a desire to further
     Balanda appreciation of land (and sea) rights of Warramiri and other Yolŋu. He was nicknamed the
     ‘father of Aboriginal sea rights’ (McIntosh, 2015, p. 224) and in his famous ‘Flag Proposal’, Burrumarra
     constructed a new ‘national’ flag design, with sacred Warramiri images (of riŋgitj ancestors) but also
     including the Union Jack, as the sacred symbol of the Balanda (Figure 2). Burrumarra spoke of the flag
     initiative as a ‘Treaty’ proposal; a path of reconciliation:

            Birrinydji in the past dictated that we must honour him and follow his law...Today, people live
            as one group...We live by a new law. Our histories have merged. (McIntosh, 1999, p. 75) 4

     4 Burrumarra’s collaboration with McIntosh forms the most significant academic literature concerning Warramiri
     cosmology. Biographical essays of Burrumarra (McIntosh, 1994), evolved into a detailed doctoral thesis (McIntosh,
     1997), a monograph concerning Warramiri cosmology in the context of the Australian reconciliation movement
     (McIntosh, 1999). Lastly, a string of articles directly inspired by his work with Burrumarra, but enhanced by recent
     archaeological and historical discoveries has been published; Between Two Worlds: Essays in Honour of the
     Visionary Aboriginal Elder, David Burrumarra (McIntosh, 2015).
                                                                            Learning Communities | Number 24 – October 2019



                                                                                                                     63
Figure 2. Warramiri ‘Flag Treaty’ Proposal




McIntosh, 1997

A further, pertinent symbolic example occurred at a press conference held during Burrumarra’s own
funeral in 1994. The Manbuyŋa ga Rulyapa proposal was released (to alter the Land Rights Act
(NT) whereby Indigenous ownership only extended as far as the shoreline5), outlining a plan for joint
management of the Arafura Sea (where significant Warramiri ancestral stories lie through the whale and
other beings); ‘to see both Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal knowledge combined in the management of
the sea and for the Warramiri and other Aborigines to progressively reassume responsibility for various
levels of its care, based on customary law’ (McIntosh, 1997, p. 34). In the same era, Goṉḏarra also
summarizes the profound ethical, reciprocal responsibilities by explaining ‘the land is my mother. Like a
human mother, the land gives us protection, enjoyment and provides for our needs-economic, social and
religious’ (Yule, 1980, p. 8). However, the remainder of the ‘My Mother, the Land’ booklet demonstrates
how this is a generic metaphor largely for the benefit of Balanda; various mala (clan) leaders outline the
complex, overlapping, interconnected responsibilities towards land emanating from the gurruṯu kinship
system (with associated historical/political caretaker roles) determining ethical responsibilities to speak
(or not to speak) on behalf of, and care for, numerous, very specific portions of land. Of course, all
Yolŋu ceremonial performances comprise of both land and sea song series (Magowan, 2001), and the
interaction of salt and fresh water, sea currents and wind, moon etc. are particularly powerful exemplars
of the overall Yolŋu cosmological empahsis of diversity within unity; ‘co-substantive essences allow
groups and individuals to identify themselves as distinct yet united’ (Magowan, 2001, p. 32). Or as
Tamisari notes: ‘Yolngu repeatedly remarked to me: ‘We are the same’, or ‘we are on the same line,
share the same songs and dances and the same sacred objects, yet we are different’. As the Yolngu
refrain goes ‘one and many, together and alone, close and far apart’ (wanggany ga dharrwa; rrambangi
ga gaana, galki ga barrkuwatj respectively)’ (Tamisari, 1998, p. 260).

Thus, there is clearly a nuanced and continually re-negotiated, lived-out ‘tension’ between the clan and
the whole Yolŋu cosmos (as alluded to in Guthadjaka’s water story) in relation to land. Indeed, as with
many Aboriginal cosmologies (from a strict cosmogonic point of view), the land pre-exists the great,
shared creation narratives such as the Djaŋka’wu (dhuwa) and Wawilak (yirritja) sisters. Creation is
never ex nihilo, or as Williams quips: ‘And then there was the word’ (Williams, 1986, p. 27), signifying
both the land’s eternal, pre-existence, but also the vital ‘role that Yolngu give words, especially names, in
the cosmology that validates people’s rights in land’ (Williams, 1986, p. 27). The ultimate impact of these
unifying, holistic creation narratives (with associated song, dance and artistic symbols) are land-affirming
rights, coupled with a kinship system whereby everyone is connected to everything in the cosmos through
5 The issue of sea knowledges and rights will undoubtedly be of increasing importance to Warramiri interaction
with public policy as the the people of the coral reef and the deep sea (Burrumarra, 1977). However, presently the
famous ‘Blue Mud Bay’ High Court decision confirms Yolŋu sea rights applies only to the intertidal zone.
                                      Warramiri Yolŋu cosmology: an introduction | Ben van Gelderen, Kathy (Gotha) Guthadjaka,
                   Linda Ford, James Walun Bukulatjpi, Chloe Ford, Emily Ford, Bettina Danganbarr, Pawinee Yuhun and Ruth Wallace


64
     the moiety affiliations. It is a ‘logic of meaning that specifies transformations of time and agency, so that
     cosmogony, cosmology, and ontology are embedded in a single matrix’ (Williams, 1986, p. 22). However,
     the Yolŋu cosmology is not a static, uncontested domain. For example, early anthropolgists focussed
     signifcantly upon the Djaŋka’wu ceremonial song-cycle, (as allegedly the ‘most important of all rituals
     relate to Djanggawul’ (Berndt & Berndt, 1954, p. 10) and when noticing differences in observations,
     considered them regional variations (Yirrkala versus Miliŋimbi) or ommissions, ‘apparently most of the
     beginning of the Djanggawul myth was unknown to Warner’s informants’ (Berndt, 1953, p. 49). However,
     later anthropologists convincingly demonstrated that substantial differences in the basic Djaŋka’wu
     narrative were known and common place between clans: ‘the central and apparently unique event
     occurred at the country of the person relating the story, but people were of course aware that details
     told by others were incompatible… Yolngu did not appear to seek a unitary vision of the world’ (Keen,
     1994, p. 61). Such clear and sustained examples of difference do not necessarily create disharmony, but,
     rather, elucidate a Yolŋu epistemological/cosmological principle of multiple realities: ‘two or more groups
     possessed a form in common such as the programme of a complex ceremony... but each could include
     specific elements of its own, and each attached different significance to its sequences of dance and
     song. They could thus co-operate in a performance while each retained its particular identity, ancestry
     and connections with country’ (Keen, 1994, p. 38). In a similar fashion, although clan country is vital to the
     Yolŋu cosmology, it is not as stable and unilaterally defined as early anthropologists suggested: ‘Yolŋu
     contested the definition of country, as well as rights over it… people sometimes competed for control of
     country, each trying to make his or her accounts of its significance prevail’ (Keen, 1994, p. 102). Thus,
     although many narratives are shared between Yolŋu clans; unique, relative perspectives are tolerated
     and, in fact, celebrated6 and negotiation concerning differing claims to rights of land is significant.

     Such a conclusion brings us back to the importance of local, Warramiri perspectives and so we briefly
     outline two local stories which interact with the pre-eminent land axiology:


     Stories
     In her address upon receiving her honorary doctorate in October 2018, Guthadjaka shared the following
     story:

            Long, long ago, when the spring tides surged on stormy seas, an octopus and a stingray
            found themselves in the small fresh-water hole at my homeland Gäwa. The stingray and the
            octopus thrashed about, arguing over the waterhole. They eventually tired of this, settled
            down and reached agreement. Now, the stingray is very smart at finding his way, even when
            the waters are muddy. We call him Guṉdjurru and he is very knowledgeable. The octopus
            is also very smart and can reach in or out to handle many things at the same time. They
            decided together that the octopus would sit in the hole as guardian and the stingray would
            swim in and out on the big spring tides and so they went their separate ways in peace.

            Now, to understand this story, you will need to know that my people identify themselves
            with these animals. The octopus and stingray represent the two Warramiri clans. Long,
            long ago, two brothers, one at the head of each clan, made big trouble for each other.
            When they came to the water hole at Gäwa, they remembered that their totems had made
            peace in that place. Today, their descendants live together at peace in the homeland they
            share. Sometimes we visit the waterhole just to remember to accept one another with all
            our differences… We feel most comfortable in our own fields of work, yet we do not thrive in
            isolation. We thrive when we live and work together across many fields, in agreement and
            cooperation. Our connections, agreements and friendships are vital to our prosperity as a
            nation that highly values education.

            I would like to quote from Isaiah 11:6 from the Bible:

     6 	 Identities must be preserved and fore grounded in the production of knowledge which depends crucially on
     identifying, acknowledging, and actively maintaining the differences of language, dance, art, etc., among various
     contributing totemic groups’ (Christie, 2004, p. 5).
                                                                         Learning Communities | Number 24 – October 2019



                                                                                                                  65
      Djupalim ŋarru wakinŋum, maḏakarritjma wuŋgan ga boḏinyma wäyin lämma barkthu yaki
      rrambaŋin nyinay, wakalŋin barkthu nyin, ga yothuyu buliki’yum ga läyindhum ŋarri yaki
      rrambaŋin mulmum ṉukay, ga yolŋun yumurrku barkthu yaki banya djäkam wäyin’kum mala.

      Then the wolf shall be a guest of the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the young
      goat; the calf and the young lion shall browse together, with a little child to lead them.
      (Guthadjaka, 2018b)

The issue of negotiation of land rights amongst the ‘branches’ of Warramiri at Gäwa is of crucial concern;
it is a long and fascinating story which is briefly alluded to here by Guthadjaka. However, the important
issue, in sharing with Balanda, is not the detail of the conflict or how exactly it was resolved, but that
resolution was achieved and that the land itself (through the much older story of the stingray and the
octopus) facilitated the outcome. In the negotiation process, in the coming together of differences,
peaceful progress was made with an ultimate goal of life on the Gäwa homeland; in such progress we
thrive.

A second, recent story comes from community life at Galiwin’ku, with Guthadjaka as one of the Yolŋu
researchers involved. In short, a proposal by the international Community Supported Agriculture (CSA)
was put to the Northern Territory government to establish a community garden in Galiwin’ku. The Charles
Darwin University Yolŋu Aboriginal Consultancy Initiative was tasked to undertake community research
on local opinion about the garden possibility. From many years of experience, Christie and the team
were committed to ‘transdisciplinary’ research (Christie, 2006) ‘which did not compromise the methods or
epistemologies of Yolŋu knowledge making’ (Christie, 2014, p. 58). The resulting methodology is briefly
described:

Firstly, a group of six Yolŋu consultants were chosen, ‘all connected through webs of kinship to each
other, to the whole population of Galiwin’ku and to their various ancestral estates on the island and on
the mainland’ (Christie, 2014, p. 58). Nevertheless, the consultants all agreed that Buthimaŋ who had run
a banana plantation for many years and was considered the expert Yolŋu gardener should be talked to
initially. He advised them to ‘‘think about the land first’. Each piece of land belongs to particular people,
managed by particular other people, and everyone has one kind of relation or another to every named
place. When we listen to a new idea, Buthimaŋ said, we need to begin with the connections we already
have’ (Christie, 2013b, p. 47). As Christie highlights, this was not just a matter of courtesy to the existing
gardener, but the process of the ‘right people talking to the right people in the right place at the right
time in the right order’ (Christie, 2013b, p. 49); it was fundamentally a rejection of the notion of epistemic
equality, as alluded to in our Methodology section. Although the community was to be consulted, due
to kinship relationships, not everyone’s voice would carry the same authority; ‘everyone is related to
Buthimaŋ and to his land, but in many different ways’ (Christie, 2013b, p. 50), or expressed more fully,
‘wherever the garden is placed, the old people made clear, the land belongs to someone. The way that
people relate to the vegetables would be understood in terms of their kinship links to that land and its
owners’ (Christie, 2014, p. 60). Christie conludes that the Yolŋu researchers turned technical ‘community’
questions (how many people would support the concept, was $30 reasonable to sustain the business,
where should it be positioned etc.) into ‘a collective moral problem... embracing the difficult, complex and
authoritative work of listening to everyone differently’ (Christie, 2014, p. 50).

For present purposes, we argue that it was a clear example of contemporary re-negotiation and re-
enactment of cosmological principles founded on the pre-emince of land determining theoretical and
practical processes to a small-scale public policy issue. In the end, though there was general agreement
that a community garden akin to the Mission days would be a good idea, consultants reported back that
it had to be properly negotiated and built on what was already established. That is, ‘while the government
essentially wanted the Yolŋu to predict what a viable community garden would be like, the Yolŋu were
concentrated upon how we could work towards a community garden together in good faith’ (Christie,
2013b, p. 51). Sadly, the garden never progressed beyond the research phase, the holistic cosmology;
‘the staggeringly complex interrelatedness of Yolŋu life, land, and history’ (Christie, 2014, p. 61) proved
too much for government decision makers and the project was abandoned.
                                      Warramiri Yolŋu cosmology: an introduction | Ben van Gelderen, Kathy (Gotha) Guthadjaka,
                   Linda Ford, James Walun Bukulatjpi, Chloe Ford, Emily Ford, Bettina Danganbarr, Pawinee Yuhun and Ruth Wallace


66
     Inside/Outside epistemology
     Perhaps to understand the complexity of the ‘garden’ story, government Balanda needed some
     introduction to the broader epistemological foundation, that land is profoundly connected to knowledge
     and truth. We return to Guthadjaka’s session from ‘Teaching from Country’:

      Ŋunhi dhu ŋanyany luŋgurrmay boy’yun, ŋayiny                When the north easterly blows, he will say ‘Ahhh,
      dhu bitjan ‘Yakay, yal’yurra ŋarra dhika’, bitjan           I’m feeling cool and relaxed’, he says.
      ŋayi li.
                                                                  The north easterly and the south westerly are
      Luŋgurrma ga djalathaŋ manda wata ŋunhi                     gentle winds. You see, we need that, we get
      gurrum’ manda, balanyaray. We need that,                    teaching from them.
      nhakun, teaching limurr dhu märram.

      Ga manda Dhuwa manda wata, bärra, ga                        And the two Dhuwa winds, the westerly and the
      dhimurru, ŋunhi rirri’rirri. Bapmaram walal                 easterly are rough.
      dhu, dry-kum ŋula nhaltjan, ga still ŋunhi li ga
      ŋorra, marŋgikunhawuy limurruŋ, ga bulu ŋayi                They buffet and dry things out, but still there is
      li dhiyaŋ lakaram dhäwu, mayali’mirr dhäwu,                 knowledge there for us, and so it tells its story,
      ga ŋayi dhu djamarrkuli pick up ŋunhiyi, beŋur              full of meaning, and the story will be picked up by
      nyumukuniny’ŋur.                                            children, from when they are very young.
      Nhakun märrma’ ga layer ŋorra, waŋgany inside,              You see there are two layers, one inside, and one
      ga waŋganydja outside.                                      outside.

      Marŋgithirr walal dhu warraŋulwuy dhäwu, ga                 They will learn the outside story, and they will
      bulu djinawa’ walal dhu marŋgithirr dhiyaldja,              learn the inside one too, through the metaphor, its
      metaphor-ŋur ga bulu gurrutu ga dhäwu ŋunhiliyi.            kinship and stories.
      Yaka yän mulkurrwu ŋanydja dhiyak ŋayaŋuw,                  Not just for the head, but for the inner being, the
      birrimbirrwu, märrwu, ŋayi ŋunhi li dhuwandja               spirit and for good faith, if he gets it, the inside
      märram, manda dhu yuwalk nhänhamirri, ga                    and outside will truly come together and help
      gurrutuy maŋutjiy guŋga’yunmirr. Ga balanya.                each other through the perspective of kinship.
     (Guthadjaka, 2010, p. 30-31).

     The key concept expressed in this excerpt is the revealing of the ‘layers’ involved in Warramiri growth
     into knowledge. It is sometimes referred to as the inside-outside dynamic: ‘the inside:outside distinction
     is an all-pervasive one in Yolngu culture. Almost everything has an inside and an outside form or can be
     divided into inside and outside components’ (Morphy, 1991, p. 78). In his exegesis of Yolŋu art, Morphy
     elaborates on this Yolŋu standpoint which flows from ‘a worldview in which everything ultimately stems
     from ancestral power and ancestral design… an underlying metaphysical basis’ (Morphy, 1991, p. 83).
     In essence, reality is comprised of both ‘outside’ expressions and experiences and ‘inside’ sources of
     power (usually connected to ancestral design (minytji) and objects (raŋga) initiated by ancestral-beings
     (waŋarr)), and truth is a layered continuum based on ever-increasing sacred/secret revealings or levels
     of understanding. As an epistemological foundation, ‘the ancestral world extends into the everyday
     world, the inside flows into the outside. Outside forms are in a sense generated by inside forms and are
     not separate from them’ and thus, ‘certain things are secret because they are powerful rather than the
     other way around’ (Morphy, 1991, p. 80, p. 95). Guthadjaka refers to this in at least two ways. Firstly, she
     takes up the example of the winds to demonstrate that there is an ‘outside’ understanding of directions
     and extents, which impact on hunting and other homeland life-choices, but there is also the ‘metaphor’ as
     to what the winds teach about ‘kinship and stories’. It is not necessary for Balanda to understand these
     metaphors (and often it is excluded explicitly), but the layered nature of knowledge is the vital distinction.
     Secondly, Guthadjaka highlights how learning is therefore both for the ‘head’ and ‘for the inner being,
     the spirit and for good faith’; another connected layering of truth. And clearly, the wind is only one small
     example, relating back to the vitality of living and learning on ancestral estates to experience all the
     land’s teachings. Or as Rudder argues: ‘as all named things in the outside world are transformations of
     elements of the inside of reality, then the whole cosmos and every discrete element of it becomes an
     unbounded vehicle of religious knowledge’ (Rudder, 1993, p. 61).
                                                                          Learning Communities | Number 24 – October 2019



                                                                                                                   67
As we shall see below concerning Guthadjaka’s sharing of the djurwirr, although the inside-outside
dynamic is most obvious in terms of levels of meaning of clan narratives (dhäwu) with restrictions applying
to women and uninitiated men, it is not limited in application to discussion of Yolŋu religious substance
and power. As Morphy notes, it ‘can be used as a logical schema that can be applied to many situations,
for example, to formulate an argument, to put forward a proposition, or to attempt to grasp the essential
structure of something’ (Morphy, 1991, p. 80). Indeed, its potential to integrate other cosmological
systems and accommodate change is of profound importance. For example, Williams records an old
man at Yirrkala asserting that the ‘Macassans’ were expected by Yolŋu when they first appeared because
when the ancestral beings were investing the world with meaning ‘spirit-macassans had appeared. They
brought with them in spirit form the things the “real” Macassans would later bring and explained their use
to Yolngu... (thus) the cause of change can be attributed retrospectively and the integrity of the cosmos
sustained’ (Williams, 1986, p. 28). In a similar vein, Bos, in his dissertation on the adoption of Christianity
amongst Yolŋu and the Christian ‘revival’ at Elcho Island in the late 1970s specifically, follows through
the inside-outside dynamic literally as links of logical suppositions, concluding ‘that which is new and true
is simply a revelation of what has always been’ (Bos, 1988, p. 371). Indeed, the inside-outside dynamic
is a powerful force for social harmony and adaptation of Yolŋu to the incredibly rapid change their social
structures have been forced to accommodate over the last century. As Rudder concludes:

      The Yolŋu Cosmos is a viable and living structure, which while as the Yolŋu say of it that
      it “is unchanging” yet it is capable within that “unchangingness”, of constant adaptation to
      changing circumstances and experiences while at the same time providing stability and a
      secure perception of identity through that change. (Rudder, 1993, p. 33)

More recently, in relation to religion (2005), science (2003), homelands (2008) and, in particular, evolving
funeral practices (2012, 2016) the Morphys have begun to expound a more general theory of ‘relative
autonomy’ whereby ‘both within Yolngu society and in its articulations with the encompassing world,
this autonomy has always been relative rather than absolute… rather than becoming “intercultural,”
Yolngu systems and subsystems remain relatively autonomous. They change in response to external
pressures while maintaining their own distinct trajectories’ (Morphy & Morphy, 2013, p. 177). Indeed,
there is a provisionality even within the inside-outside dynamic in that changes over time naturally occur;
‘the content of the categories changes: what was once restricted becomes public and what was once
public becomes restricted’, and ‘a particular interpretation is inside only until one has been told a further
interpretation that is said to be more inside’, and content and form issues can separate ‘what may be
restricted is knowledge that a painting was done, not knowledge of the painting itself’ (Morphy, 1991, p.
76, p. 78).
                                      Warramiri Yolŋu cosmology: an introduction | Ben van Gelderen, Kathy (Gotha) Guthadjaka,
                   Linda Ford, James Walun Bukulatjpi, Chloe Ford, Emily Ford, Bettina Danganbarr, Pawinee Yuhun and Ruth Wallace


68
     Stories
     Figure 3: Gäwa Christian School logo




     We have briefly looked at the story of the fresh-water hole at Gäwa, as shared by Guthadjaka. However,
     it is pertinent to note that when Ben lived at Gäwa in 2009-2010, this story was not widely shared, the
     literally ‘inside’ jungle area of Gäwa was generally considered a no-go zone for Balanda and he knew of
     the story, but only due to its visual representation on the school logo (Figure 3). During 2013, the school
     did have an ‘excursion’ to the fresh-water hole and a version of the story was shared by the ‘old man’ of
     the Warramiri, Ceremonial Custodian, James Wäluŋ Bukulatjpi. Recently, in October 2018, Ben returned
     to Gäwa to record some further community research on the history of Warramiri interactions with sea-
     faring outsiders over the centuries. Wäluŋ again suggested we visit the water-hole and he explained the
     presence of the djambaŋ (tamarind) tree, which had come from a seed from Miliŋinbi and purposively
     planted near the fresh water as a reminder of the ‘Macassan’ trade period. In talking to the school
     students, and the researchers, he also hinted at some further stories relevant to the water hole, including
     references to the enigmatic walitha-walitha (little people) and some fighting/trouble that had occurred
     nearby. What was most interesting was when Wäluŋ paused and asked a well-respected Balanda (who
     had been adopted into the Warramiri clan in the early 1970s) whether he should tell these particular
     stories to the children... Wisely, the experienced Balanda proferred no opinion either way, and we left to
     explore some further local sites of historical interest. Thus, the episode demonstrates the clear inside/
     outside dynamic of secret/sacred defintions changing over time, of age and maturity as relevant factors,
     and of the emerging dynamic of technology altering the process of the intergenerational transmssion
                                                                        Learning Communities | Number 24 – October 2019



                                                                                                                 69
of cultural stories. As Wäluŋ has stated in relation to a graduation ceremony as part of the Warramiri
cosmology project:

      The times are changing. Our old people have passed away, that’s why I say it’s time to
      write down the stories—so the new generations will not lose them. We have paintings that
      tell our stories (and I teach my own children to understand some parts of the paintings, but
      some parts are secret.) Ceremony tells the story with symbols and dance that everyone can
      enjoy, but still some things are restricted. The understanding is not given in video or audio
      for everybody, although everybody can watch and dance, not everybody will understand. I
      want the understanding recorded on paper, so it is not lost when I die... The more an older
      person understands the meanings, the more they will value them. I hold the stories of the
      Duck and the Whale because the old people trusted them to me. But still all Warramiri use
      the stories; they are partly preserved by use.

A second pertinent example concerns women explicitly and leadership roles in modern Yolŋu society.
The inside-outside dynamic is often predicated upon the exclusion of women to access ‘inside’ objects,
images and narratives. Indeed, there is a narrative justification for this exclusion from some of the ‘big’
dhäwu (stories), such as the Djaŋka’wu sisters, who had their sacred objects stolen by men, who ‘seized
control of certain ultimate manifestations of the inside, which thereby gave them the power to act in ritual’
(Morphy, 1991, p. 97). This is a fascinating area for analysis concerning the interplay of cosmological
beliefs and current practices for a number of reasons. Firstly, even in the 1970s, there was ambiguity
around women’s exclusion to ‘inside’ knowledge and power. Morphy records that women still extensively
utilised the dynamic as ‘a logical principle for talking about the world, and they gain access to things
that are inside relative to other things’ and, in fact, also partook of the layering of secret/sacred; ‘women
in particular gain increasing access to restricted knowledge according to their age, status and interest
they show in ritual matters’ (Morphy, 1991, p. 96, p. 76). More profoundly, there were hints (likely ‘inside’
interpretations of some of the big dhäwu) of an identity connection between ‘inside’ and women as a
cosmological fundamental. Thus, Morphy records Narritjin often claiming ‘“really women are the inside”…
referring both to the fact that inside meanings often refer to female things, (and women)… as generators
and sources of power’ (Morphy, 1991, p. 97). Williams concurs from her land rights fieldwork at Yirrkala,
as senior men explained ‘that the profoundest and most sacred meanings of many of the spirit-beings
are female or else have an important characteristic (or property or activity) that is associated with women’
(Williams, 1986, p. 50).

Guthadjaka notes the importance of the Warramiri decision in the 1980s in relation to the mala (clan)
town council:

      My leader was David Burrumarra... none of the other clans had a female on their group.
      David Burrumarra… he chose me to be on the council to represent women, but there was
      no other women to represent their clan. (Guthadjaka, 2018c)

In fact, it was not Burrumarra’s first foray into ‘re-adjusting’ male/female power roles, as the (in)famous
Memorial of the 1950s, where scared emblems had been put on public display (as discussed below),
saw many women rush to the bush, fearing death as punishment for viewing their clan’s sacred
emblems. Indeed, it is undoubted that the impact of the large-scale adoption of Christianity was a
distinct, epistemological challenge to the gender restriction of the inside-outside dynamic. In particular,
protestant, evangelical Methodism with its emphasis on the ‘priesthood of all believers’ ensured early
women missionaries taught (adult) Sunday school classes and preached in formal church services
(McKenzie, 1976; Kadiba, 1998; Wearing, 2007). Keen is explicit on the historical adaptation that
occurred: ‘the move towards inclusiveness through Christianity threatened to erode the power of the
older men, which rested on the constitution and control of secret religious knowledge and practices, for
Christianity challenged the very separation of ‘inside’ and ‘outside’’ (Keen, 1994, p. 287). How exactly
this adaptation evolved in terms of Yolŋu women’s involvement in public decision making seems to have
also depended on the localised Mission leadership approaches, and thus some regional differences are
apparent. Williams notes at the time of her fieldwork that ‘women do –and must- participate in religious
activity and political decision making, and that senior women are expected to act as leaders and are
admired for being strong. Not all Yolngu men share this view of the importance of women’s public roles,
                                     Warramiri Yolŋu cosmology: an introduction | Ben van Gelderen, Kathy (Gotha) Guthadjaka,
                  Linda Ford, James Walun Bukulatjpi, Chloe Ford, Emily Ford, Bettina Danganbarr, Pawinee Yuhun and Ruth Wallace


70
     however; Keen (personal communication) says that men at Milingimbi expressly deny it’ (Williams, 1986,
     p. 51). Whereas both Keen (1994) and Bos (1988) argue that the Mission leadership style at Galiwin’ku
     had a profound impact as a necessary precondition for the further gender-equitizing Christian ‘revival’
     of the late 1970s. Of course, the pertinent question remains as to how the inside-outside dynamic has
     altered and/or continues to impact public policy regarding Yolŋu women in present communities.


     Multiple ontologies
     From her prepared acceptance speech for Senior Australian of the Year, 2018 (Northern Territory),
     Guthadjaka relied on djurwirr (Great bowerbird, Chlamydera nuchalis) nesting practices:

     Figure 4: Djurwir

                                                                 1. Ancient generations of djurwirr made their
                                                                 nests from sticks and grass and decorated them
                                                                 with shells and pebbles. They kept a special
                                                                 pattern for their nest.




     2. Today the colors and content of the
     decorations have changed. Some keep colored
     glass, some like green, some like blue—some
     even keep a mobile phone and a bit of cash
     handy. Everything is mixed together and the bird
     is living in two worlds, filled with mixed treasures
     from old and new.




                                                                 3. There are guardians and protectors outside –
                                                                 to stop theft of the treasured knowledge, but this
                                                                 can also protect and manage too much impact
                                                                 from outside influences and/or not acknowledging
                                                                 the authority of the guardians.
                                                                      Learning Communities | Number 24 – October 2019



                                                                                                               71
                                                     4. Not everything is accepted and the pattern has
                                                     not changed. Djurwirr keeps a clear pathway and
                                                     line of vision from its nest.




                                                     5. My people are like djurwirr. Warramiri are
                                                     colourful people, yet we discern. The clear path
                                                     needs to be made; when you have a clear path
                                                     you can organise and see clearly. Then treasured
                                                     things can be kept safe and valued, and some
                                                     can be shared, to give comfort or teach us
                                                     valuable lessons in both worlds’ (Guthadjaka,
                                                     2018a).




In typical style, Guthadjaka’s image is appealing and memorable, but also layered. The ‘metaphor’ clearly
highlights the Warramiri foundation of selective adaptation and adoption, but also alludes to the secret/
sacred knowledge domain (‘treasured things can be kept safe and valued, and some can be shared’)
and the ‘protective’ function of Elders (‘manage too much impact from outside influences and/or not
acknowledging the authority of the guardians’) to, ultimately, negotiate the future vision (‘when you have
a clear path you can organise and see clearly’). In many ways, the djurwirr image can be considered an
elaboration of the lesson in Guthadjaka’s other published parable, Yuṯa Gonydjuy (The New Wax). In
this true-life story, native bees began to use the tar from newly sealed roads in Galiwin’ku to make their
honey. This was a mistake! The concluding section of the story reads:
                                      Warramiri Yolŋu cosmology: an introduction | Ben van Gelderen, Kathy (Gotha) Guthadjaka,
                   Linda Ford, James Walun Bukulatjpi, Chloe Ford, Emily Ford, Bettina Danganbarr, Pawinee Yuhun and Ruth Wallace


72
      Bili Godthu djanaliŋgu gunyan marimi ŋuwakurru              God already gave them everything that is good,
      gonydjuy’ djämawu, mädjanal ŋarru djäma                     they only had to look around hard and use their
      ŋamaŋamayun djanaliŋguway djanal ŋayi, ga                   own skills for making the sugar-bag, using the
      guku ga waripu malany ŋuwatjuman bayiŋuya                   natural wax from the flowers that blossom in the
      gonydjuy’yu.                                                bush. Take care of this way well and the sugar-
                                                                  bag that comes from the bush will be sweet and
      Ga gukum ŋarru marimin latjun dhäkayma.                     beautiful to taste.
      Ga bilanyaya bili nhawun Godthu gunyan                      In the same way God already gave us a good law
      ŋalmaliŋgu ŋuwakurru rom. Mäŋalma ŋarru                     to live by and built a foundation for our identity.
      djäma nyena, ga garryunmi ŋunhuŋ nhäwu                      In this way we can come together and live as
      ŋuwakurruwu romgu.                                          one people. Not out by ourselves, chasing our
                                                                  own ideas. Let us not be like the honey bees.
      Ŋalma ŋarru bukmak buku-manapanmi ga
                                                                  These days many people are very excited and
      waŋganydji nyena waŋgany mala ga yaka buku-
                                                                  influenced by new ideas and laws coming into our
      gänaŋ’dji. Ŋalma yaka bitjan nhawun banya guku
                                                                  lives.
      ḏawurr malany. Banya djanal yaka mulkuruyun
      romdhun nyena djinaŋ bala.
      Ga nyäkuḻim banya bitjanna maḻŋ’thun gam.                   To me it appears that today we are so happy
                                                                  holding on to new ways, but already they have
      Bili djinaŋum bala ŋalma yaka marimin goŋmiyi               brought lots of confusion, and we are very
      ga nyäku’yunmi yuṯawun ga mulkuruwun                        frustrated in this difficult position between old and
      romgu, bilanya nhawun guku ḏawurr malany.                   new. It is not good for us and our children. Let
      Bawalamiwun ŋalma yaka malthunma                            us go back to our ancient paths and follow our
      mulkuruwun romgu.                                           ancestor’s footsteps and work with peace and joy.
      Ga yaka djuwanma ŋuwakurru ŋalmaliŋguru                     This is the end of the story about the bees.
      yumurrku’wu. Ŋalma ḏitjunna balayan
      ŋaliŋguwaywuḻi djukaḻi ga romḻi, banya nhäyiny
      djanaliŋgu ŋaḻapaḻmiwu rom. Nhalpiyan
      djanal yakan nyenan ŋarrin ŋoy-gurrum’thu
      ga mägayayu romdhu. Ga bilin djaŋu
      dhawar’yuwannan.
      Yow, Garrayma yaka garryun nhumaliŋgu bitjan,               Jesus says to you people who belong to him:
      bayyiguya warrawu banyaya nyeli nhanguway
      yolŋu’-yulŋu warra.                                         ‘Stand at the crossroad and look; ask for the
                                                                  ancient paths, ask where the good way is, and
      Nhäŋa ŋarriya rangaŋ bayikuyam banya                        walk in it. Then you will find rest for your souls’.
      djukawum dhunupawum, dhäwirrkayunmiya
      ŋarriya.                                                    Jeremiah 6:16

      Ŋala djika djuka ŋuwakurrum wal’ŋu. Banyayam
      banya nhan Garrayu nyipan ŋätjil?

       Ŋarriya bayiyiwitja bili djukamurru mänhunu
      ŋarru nyena yaka ŋayaŋum wurrkurrumŋan
      romŋa.
     (Guthadjaka, 1998)

     Thus, Yuṯa Goydjuy embodies the message of the djurwirr bower that ‘not everything is accepted, and
     the pattern has not changed’; not all of the ‘new ways’ are productive. However, by implication of the
     story, Christianity itself is not one of these ‘new ways’. Indeed, it is impossible to miss the references to
     faith and God throughout Guthadjaka’s presentations, including the (Holy) Spirit in the conclusion of the
     Djuranydjura re-working, the crying by the waters of Babylon/Balanda education practices, and the lion
     and the lamb negotiated agreement imagery from Isaiah.
                                                                        Learning Communities | Number 24 – October 2019



                                                                                                                 73
Figure 5: The Memorial, Galiwin’ku




Such an integration, a synthesis of co-existant ontologies is certainly also to be seen in Burrumarra’s life
and work. Back in 1957, Warramiri and Wangurri elders (with a young Burrumarra as the key agitator
and spokesman) convinced a number of other clan leaders (both dhuwa and yirritja) to reveal many
sacred designs, often combined with Christian iconography, on a series of carved and painted wooden
posts at Galiwin’ku- dubbed the ‘Memorial’. In his fascinating monograph on this ‘adjustment movement’
Berndt attempted to unravel the complex and varied motivation behind the revealing of sacred/secret
knowledge. Of Burrumarra personally Berndt surmised that:

      On the one hand he wanted change from outside with greater rapidity. On the other hand
      he did not want them to overwhelm his own society and culture... If this loss of identity were
      to be avoided then some re-orientation of traditional life would be necessary. (Berndt, 1962,
      p. 39)

Thus, the movement was both a political statement and a deeply spiritual one; in essence, it was a
‘conscious attempt at redefining social organisation. The Yolŋu were to be a single unified block of clans
and Christianity was put forward as legitimizing the unity of Dhuwa and Yirritja moieties. As a cooperative
group, the Yolŋu would be in a stronger position to voice their demands vis-à-vis the Welfare Department,
missionaries, and developers’ (McIntosh, 1999, p. 70). There were also very practical benefits desired too,
understood as an exchange for revealing the sacred knowledge. Burrumarra asked: ‘these are the most
precious things we have (the raŋga). Why can’t we get a big school? (Berndt, 1962, p. 78). Interestingly,
                                      Warramiri Yolŋu cosmology: an introduction | Ben van Gelderen, Kathy (Gotha) Guthadjaka,
                   Linda Ford, James Walun Bukulatjpi, Chloe Ford, Emily Ford, Bettina Danganbarr, Pawinee Yuhun and Ruth Wallace


74
     in later years Burrumarra reflected back in typical enigmatic fashion: ‘The Adjustment Movement was
     wrong but we had to do it...there is no pleasure looking back on it, but it served its purpose’ (McIntosh,
     1994, p. 110). But, at the same time: ‘I believe in both ways, the traditional and the Christian life, but we
     have so many questions. That’s why we talk and discuss meanings. We search for the purpose of life in
     our history and in the land itself. And now we have the Bible as well’ (McIntosh, 1994, p. 77).

     The concept of ‘bothways’ in regard to synthesising Christianity and traditional Yolŋu ontologies is
     certainly not restricted to Warramiri Yolŋu. Goṉḏarra outlines theological arguments supporting such
     integration in a number of revealing texts (1986, 1987, 1992, 1996), most famously in Father, you gave
     us the Dreaming (1988). Practically, the outworking of such a cosmological foundation is most clearly
     seen in funeral practices, both now and in the past. Early anthropologists were fascinated with the
     ‘mortuary rituals’ of Yolŋu and wrote extensively on the formal ceremonial elements involved (Warner,
     1937; Thomson, 1949). However, the most poignant moment in Warner’s classic ethnography was his
     description of the death of a Warramiri man and his kinsman’s last actions; the more spontaneous and
     personal elements of his passing (Warner, 1937, p. 404). Indeed, later works reflected on the fact that
     the funeral ceremonial practices/performances, the ‘song cycles’, were never uniform, sequenced rituals,
     akin to a Catholic mass, for example, but vital opportunities to reaffirm Yolŋu ontological truth. Firstly,
     the profound connection between named reality and identity: ‘the webs of human and land relatedness-
     that is, the things which have built that individual, and which are identified by that name -are actually
     constitutive of a person’s identity, and a person’s death signifies a radical rupturing of the whole network
     of human meaning’ (Christie, 1994, p. 28). And thus, the ceremonial leaders’ responsibilities are to
     best negotiate and select and order the songs, designs and dances: ‘to link particular groups of people
     together by reference to their land, totems and ancestral history’ (Christie, 1994, p. 31). Indeed, there
     are ‘various possible routes for a song journey from the ceremonial ground to the spirit place… (the one
     chosen highlighting) the links which the deceased had with the many different related groups who have
     come to say goodbye, and the love and respect in which that person was held’ (Christie, 1994, p. 31).
     Thus, a form of multiple ontologies was always demonstrated in the negotiation and contextualisation of
     ceremonial songs, in conjunction with clan leadership of both moieties, the land the actual ceremony was
     taking place upon, and individual personalities. The Morphys’ studies of more recent funeral practices
     (2012) also indicate the profound combination of traditional Yolŋu song cycles and dance sequences,
     ‘Macassan’ influences, Christian iconography and speech making, and idiosyncratic elements to best
     capture the individual, their relation to the land and related clans and their impacts on the broader
     Balanda world. However, the key is to understand that the rituals:

           are not hybrid creations made up through combining elements that history has brought into
           contact. Rather they are the product of a regional ecumene, which has at its center distinctive
           value creation processes, beliefs about the nature of being, and ways of structuring action
           to express these beliefs and values. (Morphy & Morphy, 2012, p. 53)

     Therefore, it is no so much that Yolŋu have adapted core beliefs about existence to suit new influences
     (hybridity theory), but the ‘fundamentally recursive and incorporative’ nature of Yolŋu ontology (as
     expressed in mortuary rituals) has enabled Yolŋu ‘to adapt to new contexts and seize opportunities while
     appearing to cary the past with them’ (Morphy & Morphy, 2012, p. 58). Thus, in returning to Guthadjaka’s
     ‘selective adaptation and adoption’ from djuwirr, it would seem to be clear that the Warramiri make
     explicit what is a more generalised Yolŋu cosmological foundation. In considering the impact and change
     to Yolŋu society through various waves of contact with outsiders, culminating in yearly ‘Macassan’ trade
     voyages, the Berndts concluded that Yolŋu were; ‘absorbing into their own culture certain new elements,
     rejecting others that could not readily be adapted to the existing pattern’ (Berndt & Berndt, 1954, p. 188).
     Likewise, regarding the ‘adjustment movement’, Berndt summarized ‘that we can legitimately speak of
     rapprochement between the alien and the indigenous: the one is in the process of being adapted to the
     other... inward-looking in terms of traditional integrity, outward-looking beyond the confines of linguistic
     unit and clan territory, cross-cultural dimension’ (Berndt, 1962, p. 14). Overall, Yolŋu seem to have applied
     such an approach to large scale interactions in terms of incorporating the mälk (skin) system into older
     gurruṯu kinship patterns (Shapiro, 1981) and the assimilation of Mission ‘leadership’ into existing conflict
     resolution procedures (Williams, 1987). In fact, it has been argued that a multiple ontologies foundation is
     characteristic of Yolŋu cosmology; that ‘ambiguity and relativism’ (Keen, 1994, p. 38) have long been the
     prevailing structural principles for both practical organizations of Yolŋu society (clan, country, leadership)
                                                                        Learning Communities | Number 24 – October 2019



                                                                                                                 75
and theoretical positions (knowledge, religious communication). In this, ceremonial interactions are the
profoundest enactments of the overall ontology; though groups shared a common form, it was highly
differentiated:

      each could include specific elements of its own, and each attached different significance to
      its sequences of dance and song. They could thus co-operate in a performance while each
      retained its particular identity, ancestry and connections with country… (and within groups
      themselves) shared forms current among one public, and distinctive interpretations among
      a variety of less inclusive publics and individuals. (Keen, 1994, p. 38)

In his thorough exploration of the Warramiri cosmology specifically, and the various ‘branches’ with
connections to other ‘clans’, McIntosh is equally adamant: ‘identity therefore is something that is
constructed for specific purposes and is a matter of agreement by all concerned, rather than something
unambiguous or “fixed”’ (McIntosh, 1997, p. 24). Such a position certainly finds support from the
extensive work that has developed out of the ‘bothways’ Yolŋu educational philosophy from the 1980s.
Stemming from Yolŋu educators outlining a fundamental cosmological foundation: ‘there is negotiation
of meanings between the two moieties, Dhuwa and Yirritja, which can be applied to negotiation
between Yolŋu and Balanda cultures to find the common ground that makes up the two way curriculum’
(Wunuŋmurra, 1989, p. 13), a string of profound ‘metaphors’ were then shared from kinship structures
(yothu-yindi connection, Marika, Ŋurruwutthun, & White, 1989), water commingling (gaṉma, milŋurr
and bala-lili, Marika-Munuŋgiritj, 1990) and ceremonial negotiation between clans (garma and galtha,
Marika-Munuŋgiritj, 1991). In further works, the ceremonial context was particularly highlighted, and a
shift from a pedagogical constructivism (which was most apparent) to an epistemological/ontological
constructivism was argued for. Christie utilized the garma and galtha images to elucidate co-existent
multiple ontologies: ‘in the playing out of the Galtha… the objective world attains reality only through the
received meanings which, through negotiation, we choose to foreground the pattern of our relatedness’
(Christie, 1994, p. 33), as there is ‘no split between language and materiality. Talking, singing, crying,
dancing, and painting all actively participate in the creation of new worlds as they have always done
since the ancestors first talked, sang and danced the world into existence’ (Christie, 2005, p. 64). Verran
also explicitly draws parallels with western-philosophical histories: ‘the concept of garma… a distinctive
Aboriginal epistemology that has something in common with European constructivism, except that place
is a crucial determinant of knowledge’ (Verran & Christie, 2007, p. 218) and ‘a Garma can be understood
as working like a Deweyan public, called into existence by a ‘public problem’, an issue of substantial or
serious significance’ (Verran & Christie, 2011, p. 29).


Conclusion
Mention of a ‘public problem’ is an appropriate place to conclude, for we reiterate that the function
of this introduction has always been to facilitate analysis and production of appropriate public policy
for issues of women and gender in the local Gäwa and Galiwin’ku region. From the garma image we
learn that Yolŋu have long been engaging in this process themselves, balancing profound duties and
responsibilities to land and sea, layers of knowledge and inside/outside power realms between clans and
genders, and commitments to incorporate new realities in reaching agreements. In Balanda philosophical
terms, issues of axiology, epistemology and ontology are in a perpetual relationship of negotiation, and
Warramiri Yolŋu, Burrumarra and Guthadjaka in particular, seem generously disposed to share their
cosmological foundations with interested outsiders. In conclusion, we share one last story as it draws
together many of the themes of this introduction to Warramiri cosmology. It is a story told at Gäwa (with
some humour), but mostly concerns Mayawun’pirri (Stevens Island), one of the ancestral estates of the
Budalpudal ‘branch’ of the Warramiri (McIntosh, 1997) and boyhood home of Wäluŋ. The island was one
of the first places to have an airstrip, built in the Mission days under Harold Shepherdson who actively
encouraged Yolŋu to remain on their ancestral estates; their homelands (Baker, 2018). In his home-made
airplane he would fly to the homeland family groupings, facilitate some trading arrangements and often
conduct a short Christian service. By the early 1990s the 300m airstrip on Mayawun’pirri was earmarked
for refurbishment by Marthakal Homelands Resource Centre. Warramiri families travelled out to the
island and mowed the existing strip while a Missionary Aviation Fellowship (MAF) pilot flew out to test
                                      Warramiri Yolŋu cosmology: an introduction | Ben van Gelderen, Kathy (Gotha) Guthadjaka,
                   Linda Ford, James Walun Bukulatjpi, Chloe Ford, Emily Ford, Bettina Danganbarr, Pawinee Yuhun and Ruth Wallace


76
     the surface for compliance and future potential usage. The testing went well except that the pilot advised
     that making the strip just a little but longer would be greatly beneficial, larger planes could land taking
     more passengers and more weight. Some further clearing would be necessary, including the removal of
     a Pandanus tree at the end of the airstrip. After some thought, Wäluŋ told the pilot that it couldn’t be done
     as the Pandanus tree represented something quite important in an old story connected to Mayawun’pirri.
     The pilot was insistent; what could be more important than facilitating consistent access to the land, to
     your ancestral country? The old man chose to share some of the layers of the truth; the tree actually
     represents Balanda, (from a typically fascinating Warramiri story of when a Balanda and shark fought
     at Mayawun’pirri). Indeed, the Pandanus is the Balanda, it is the Balanda access to the land as an
     ontological fundamental; knock down the tree and the Balanda role in any on-going story (including the
     possibility of flying in planes and all that could entail) would also be gone...The airstrip was left as it was.

     We hope many other positive outcomes and stories are generated from the interplay with Warramiri
     cosmology, women and gender into the future.
                                                                       Learning Communities | Number 24 – October 2019



                                                                                                                77
References
Baker, G. (2018). A legendary partnership: Yolŋu, Bäpa Sheppy and Ŋäṉḏi Ella. Darwin: Historical Society
      of the Northern Territory.

Baker G., Garŋgulkpuy J., & Guthadjaka, K. (2014). Guthadjaka and Garŋgulkpuy: Indigenous women
      leaders in Yolngu, Australia-wide and international contexts. In J. Damousi, K. Rubenstein, and M.
      Tomsic (Eds.), Diversity in Leadership: Australian Women, Past and Present (pp. 39–52). Canberra,
      Australia: Australian National University Press.

Berndt, R. (1953). Djanggawul: and Aboriginal religious cult of north-eastern Arnhem Land. New York:
      Philosophical Library.

Berndt, R. (1962). An Adjustment Movement in Arnhem Land. Mouton, Paris and The Hague: Cahiers de
      L’Homme.

Berndt, R. & Berndt, C. (1954). Arnhem Land: its history and its people. Melbourne: Hawthorn Press.

Bos, R. (1988). Jesus and the Dreaming: religion and social change in Arnhem Land. (Doctoral
      Dissertation). University of Queensland, Queensland, Australia.

Burrumarra, D. (1977). Oceanal Man: an Aboriginal view of himself. Aboriginal and Islander Health
      Worker Journal, 1(3), 52-54.

Christie, M. (1994). Grounded and Ex-centric knowledges: exploring Aboriginal alternatives to western
       thinking. In J. Edwards (Ed.), Thinking: International Interdisciplinary Perspectives (pp. 23-34).
       Victoria: Hawker Brownlow Education.

Christie, M. (2004). Computer Databases and Aboriginal Knowledge. Learning Communities:
       International Journal of Learning in Social Contexts, 1, 4-12.

Christie, M. (2005). Aboriginal Knowledge Traditions in Digital Environments. Australian Journal of
       Indigenous Education, 34, 61-66.

Christie, M. (2006). Transdisciplinary Research and Aboriginal Knowledge. The Australian Journal of
       Indigenous Education, 35, 78-89.

Christie, M. (2008). Yolngu Studies: The co-constitutivity of Teaching, Research and Aboriginal
       Community Engagement at a Regional Australian University. Gateways: International Journal of
       Community Research and Engagement, 1, 31-47.

Christie, M. (2009). Engaging with Australian Indigenous Knowledge Systems: Charles Darwin University
       and the Yolngu of Northeast Arnhemland. Learning communities: International Journal of Learning
       in Social Contexts, 7, 23-35.

Christie, M. (2013). Generative and ‘ground-up’ research in Aboriginal Australia. Learning communities:
       International Journal of Learning in Social Contexts, 13, 3-13.

Christie, M. (2013b). The Box of Vegies: Method and Metaphysics in Yolŋu Research. In M Vicars, T.
       McKenna, & J. White (Eds.), Discourse, power, resistance – Down Under, Vol. 2 (pp. 45-56).
       Rotterdam: Sense Publishers.

Christie, M. (2014). Decolonising methodology in an Arnhem Land garden. In B. Neumeier, & K. Schaffer
       (Eds.), Decolonizing the Landscape: Indigenous Cultures in Australia (pp. 57-70). Amsterdam:
       Rodopi.

Gondarra, D. (1986). Let my people go. Darwin: Bethyl Presbytery.

Gondarra, D. (1987). Overcoming the Captivities of the Western Church Context. In J. Houston (Ed.), The
     Cultured Pearl (pp. 176-182). Melbourne: The Joint Board of Christian Education.

Gondarra, D. (1988). Father, you gave us the Dreaming. Darwin: Northern Synod of the Uniting Church.
                                      Warramiri Yolŋu cosmology: an introduction | Ben van Gelderen, Kathy (Gotha) Guthadjaka,
                   Linda Ford, James Walun Bukulatjpi, Chloe Ford, Emily Ford, Bettina Danganbarr, Pawinee Yuhun and Ruth Wallace


78
     Gondarra, D. (1992). Through Similar Journeys Comes Revelation. Generation 3(1), 20–3.

     Gondarra, D. (1996). Aboriginal Spirituality and the Gospel. In A. Pattel-Gray (Ed.), aboriginal spirituality
          (pp. 41-53). Blackburn: Harper Collins.

     Guthadjaka, K. (1998). Yuṯa Gonydjuy. Galiwin’ku, Northern Territory: Shepherdson College.

     Guthadjaka, K. (2010). Teaching when nothing is lying around. Learning Communities: International
          Journal of Learning in Social Contexts, 2, 25-31.

     Guthadjaka, K. (2012, July). Meta narrative, technology and how we tell our story. Paper presented at
          Northern Territory Christian Schools Association Over the Top Conference, Darwin.

     Guthadjaka, K. (2015). Manbuyŋa Garmak Warramiri. Darwin: The Northern Institute, Charles Darwin
          University.

     Guthadjaka, K. (2018). Message for knowledge and learning. Retrieved from https://www.cdu.edu.au/
          northern-institute/gotha-bowerbird

     Guthadjaka, K. (2018b, October). Insights from ‘Ŋarrpiya ga Maranydjalk’. Speech presented at Charles
          Darwin Graduation, Darwin

     Guthadjaka, K. (2018c). My Life. Recording for Northern Institute, August 2018.

     Kadiba, J. (1998). The Methodist mission and the emerging Aboriginal church in Arnhem Land 1916-
           1977. (Doctoral Dissertation). Northern Territory University, Northern Territory, Australia.

     Keen, I. (1994). Knowledge and Secrecy in an Aboriginal Religion. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

     Keen, I. (2004). Aboriginal economy and society: Australia at the threshold of colonisation. Oxford:
           Oxford University Press.

     Magowan, F. (2001). Waves of knowing: polymorphism and co-substantive essences in Yolngu sea
         cosmology. The Australian Journal of Indigenous Education, 29(1), 22-35.

     Marika, R., Ngurruwutthun, D., & White, L. (1989). Always Together, Yaka Gäna: Participatory Research at
           Yirrkala as part of the development of a Yolngu education. Yirrkala: Yirrkala Literature Production
           Centre.

     Marika-Munuŋgiritj, R. (1990). Workshops as teaching learning environments. Ngoonjook: A Journal of
           Australian Indigenous Issues, 4, 43-55.

     Marika-Munuŋgiritj, R. (1991). How can balanda (white Australians) learn about the Aboriginal world?
           Ngoonjook: A Journal of Australian Indigenous Issues, 5, 17-25.

     McKenzie, M. (1976). Mission to Arnhem Land. Adelaide: Rigby Limited.

     McIntosh, I. (1994). The Whale and the Cross: conversations with David Burrumarra. Darwin: Historical
           Society of the Northern Territory.

     McIntosh, I. (1997). “Can we be equal in your eyes?” a perspective on reconciliation from north-east
           Arnhem Land. (Doctoral Dissertation). Charles Darwin University, Darwin, Australia.

     McIntosh, I. (1999). Aboriginal Reconciliation and the Dreaming: Warramiri Yolngu and the quest for
           equality. London: Allyn and Bacon.

     McIntosh, I. (2015). Between Two Worlds: Essays in Honour of the Visionary Aboriginal Elder, David
           Burrumarra. United States: Dog Ear Publishing.

     Morphy, F. (2003). Cross-cultural categories, Yolngu science and local discourses. (Unpublished paper).
          Centre for Cross-Cultural Research: The Australian National University.

     Morphy, F., & Morphy H. (2008). Not seeing what is there: the Northern Territory outstation movement
          and the Howard government intervention. Arena Magazine, 94, 40-43.
                                                                        Learning Communities | Number 24 – October 2019



                                                                                                                 79
Morphy, F. & Morphy, H. (2012). Soon we will be spending all our time at funerals: Yolngu mortuary
     rituals in an epoch of constant change. In S. Howell, & A. Talle (Eds.), Returns to the Field:
     Multitemporal Research and Contemporary Anthropology (pp. 49-72). Bloomington Indiana:
     Indiana University Press.

Morphy, F. & Morphy, H. (2013). Anthropological theory and government policy in Australia’s Northern
     Territory: The hegemony of the “mainstream”. American Anthropologist, 115(2), 174-187.

Morphy, H. (1991). Ancestral Connections: art and an Aboriginal system of knowledge. Chicago: The
     University of Chicago Press.

Morphy, H. (2005). Mutual Conversion? the Methodist Church and the Yolngu, with particular reference
     to Yirrkala. Humanities Research, 12(1), 41-54.

Morphy, H. (2016). Extended lives in global spaces: The anthropology of Yolngu pre-burial ceremonies.
     Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute, 22, 332-355.

Nungalinya. (2017). Nungalinya College 2015 Media Studies classes. Gotha’s story-My story and life at
     Gäwa. Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zsxd0idIATU

Rudder, J. (1993). Yolŋu Cosmology: an unchanging cosmos incorporating a rapidly changing world?
     (Doctoral Dissertation). Australian National University, Canberra, Australia.

Shapiro, W. (1981). Miwuyt marriage: the cultural anthropology of affinity in northeast Arnhem Land.
      Philadelphia: Institute for the Study of Human Issues.

Tamisari, F. (1998). Body, vision and movement: in the footprints of the Ancestors. Oceania, 68(4),
      249-270.

Thomson, D. (1949). Economic structure and the ceremonial exchange cycle in Arnhem Land.
     Melbourne: Macmillan.

van Gelderen, B., & Guthadjaka, K. (2019a). A Yolŋu ‘Bothways’ approach to English and Warramiri
     literacy at Gäwa. Australian Review of Applied Linguistics, 41(3), 252-279.

van Gelderen, B., & Guthadjaka, K. (2019b). Renewing the Yolŋu ‘Bothways’ philosophy: Warramiri
     transculturation education at Gäwa. Australian Journal of Indigenous Education, 48, 1-11.

Verran, H., & Christie, M. (2007). Using/designing digital technologies of representation in Aboriginal
      Australian knowledge practices. Human Technology; Interdisciplinary Journal of Humans in ICT
      Environments, 3(2), 214-227.

Verran, H., & Christie, M. (2011). Doing Difference Together – Towards a Dialogue with Aboriginal
      Knowledge Authorities Through an Australian Comparative Empirical Philosophical Inquiry.
      Culture and Dialogue, 1(2), 21-36.

Warner, W. (1937). A Black Civilization. Chicago: Harper & Roe.

Wearing, B. (2007). Beulah Lowe and the Yolngu People. NSW, Australia: Betsy Wearing.

Williams, D. (1994). David Burrumarra, MBE. Australian Aboriginal Studies, 2, 121-122.

Williams, N. (1986). The Yolngu and their land. Canberra: Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies.

Williams, N. (1987). Two Laws: managing dispute in a contemporary Aboriginal community. Canberra:
       Australian Institute of Aboriginal Studies.

Wunuŋmurra, W. (1989). “Dhawurrpunaramirri”: Finding the common ground for a new aboriginal
     curriculum. Ngoonjook: A Journal of Australian Indigenous Issues, 2, 12-16.

Yule, I.R. (Ed.). (1980). My Mother the Land. Elcho Island: Uniting Church of Australia.
