DKA YARNS #14: DKA releases its new Strategic Plan 2023-2025

For an enhanced experience, please view this email in your browser

Welcome to Desert Knowledge Australia's quarterly newsletter, containing the
latest activities & updates from the Desert Knowledge Precinct.
APRIL 2023

DESERT KNOWLEDGE AUSTRALIA
DKA releases its new Strategic Plan 2023-2025

The new plan delineates a roadmap of priorities and key initiatives for DKA which have been
developed in consultation with partners, stakeholders, government agencies and the local business
community.
In December 2022, an energised Board renewed DKA’s purpose to ‘share our place on country to
innovate, progress social wellbeing and sustainability for desert and arid communities.’
While DKA’s objectives broadly focus on socioeconomic development and environmental
sustainability, the new Strategic Plan highlights a return to DKA’s founding purpose – as advocate and
facilitator for the progress and sustainability of the desert region and its people – but with initial
actions strategically focused on two priority timelines: short term, and long term.
The short term pillar aims to accelerate development of DKA’s ecosystem through activation of the
Desert Knowledge Precinct (DKP), strengthening existing partnerships and networks, and expanding
revenue streams via prospective partners.
Immediate projects include developing onsite accommodation, to be made available to DKP students
and research alumni, nurturing synergies between partners, tenants and visitors, and eﬀectively
increasing utilisation of the space.

The long term pillar will see DKA’s key partnerships progress the Desert Resilience Initiative via the
establishment of a ‘Living Lab’ to collaborate on deep dive research into the most urgent needs of our
remote communities, such as:

• Climate resilience
• Water scarcity
• Renewable energy
• Extreme heat mitigation
• Climate adaptive housing
This will allow DKA to better explore and coordinate implementation of sustainable service systems,
thereby accelerating the roll-out of solutions to address the most prevalent problems being faced by
desert communities.
'The DKA Board is proud of our strategic plan and thanks all the people across government,
education and community sectors who willingly gave their time and oﬀered valuable insights into it.
The hard work is ahead of us now to deliver on this ambitious but timely plan that will see beneﬁts
and positive impacts across the region’, said DKA Chair, Sera Bray.
“With Precinct Partners, Batchelor Institute & Centre for Appropriate Technology, we’re working to
ensure the potential of the Precinct is realised, and its value to the wider community clearly
demonstrated. Ultimately, our collective goal is to be established as a national and international
Centre for research and education on sustainable desert living – and, we want our central Australian
community to be a part of the journey, because we truly are all in this together,” said CEO Jimmy
Cocking.
To view a summary of DKA's new Strategic Plan, please visit DKA's website. To arrange a 30minute brieﬁng for your investment team by CEO Jimmy Cocking, please contact (08) 8959 6000.

DESERT KNOWLEDGE PRECINCT
Master Planning for the Precinct commences

Kicking oﬀ the initiatives contained within DKA’s new Strategic Plan 2023-2025, a co-design Master
Planning workshop for the Desert Knowledge Precinct was held over two days in March facilitated by
Michael and David from Jensen PLUS, and Sue and Claire of Sue Dugdale & Associates.
The workshop held over 22-23 March was attended by 15 DKA-stakeholders and representatives
from: The Centre for Appropriate Technology Limited (CfAT), Batchelor Institute of Indigenous Tertiary
Education, Yirara College of the Finke River Mission Inc., Lhere Artepe Aboriginal Corporation, and NT
Government, and the DKA Board. The workshop comprised three smaller groups who
independently envisioned some very strongly aligned creative outcomes the Desert Knowledge
Precinct, particularly around the development of onsite student accommodation.
As the ideas formulate and progress into draft plans, we’ll be sharing and consulting widely as they
become available. The ﬁrst Draft DKP Master Plan is expected to be presented by Jensen Plus and Sue
Dugdale in late-April.
Sincere thanks to the Northern Territory Government for making the Master Planning process
possible.
________________________
DKA proudly manages the DKP, working closely with the Desert Peoples Centre members Batchelor Institute and
Centre for Appropriate Technology (CfAT), to create a vibrant place for education, training, research and knowledge
sharing.

RENEWABLE ENERGY
Big B.E.S.S. arrives at the Precinct!

Big BESS is a 300kW/358kWh Battery Energy Storage System (BESS) which is facilitating the
transformation of the Desert Knowledge Precinct into a local microgrid.
The microgrid is just one of the trials, models and investigations that form part of DKA’s Alice Springs
Future Grid project and, as part of the trial, the team seeks to identify and overcome technical and
regulatory barriers to understand liabilities for supply during periods of disconnection from
the network.
Big BESS is in the ﬁnal stages of commissioning and will be storing electricity generated by the DKA
Solar Centre to then either release it back into the network as required, support key operations at the
Desert Knowledge Precinct when islanded, or provide grid support functions.
John and Matthew from the AZZO team, who have played an integral part of DKA’s Solar Centre since
its inception came to visit newly installed BESS during its commissioning at the Precinct. AZZO have
also provided critical information from the big battery for the Alice Springs Future Grid project. Big
BESS was supplied by Penske Australia & New Zealand.
[PHOTO: L-R] John Azzollini COO & Matthew Farrelly Account Manager of AZZO, the Electrical Contractor from HV/LV
Solutions, Jimmy Cocking CEO at DKA, and Paul Rodden Project Manager of Ekistica.

CODES 4 LIFE
Men's 2023 Program begins...

Codes 4 Life Men's workshops continue into the new year with the ﬁrst for 2023 held at DKA's
Business & Innovation Centre on 24 February.
Forming part of DKA's Social Wellbeing Initiative, there have been four C4L men's workshops held in
Alice Springs and Tennant Creek since August 2022, involving a total of 136 Aboriginal men, including
Elders (as co-facilitators) and over 90 men from communities participating.
The December and February C4L workshops saw (respectively) 25 and 38 men
participating from Papunya, Ntaria, Amplatawatja, Mutitjulu, Kintore, Ti Tree, Tennant Creek,
Yuendumu, and Laramba – supported by DASA and CAAAPU – with the group including eight Elders
and four guest speakers from Territory Families, SJA Paramedics, Tangentyere MBCP, and NT Police.
Talks included a range of topics, such as:

• Rates of Alcohol-related oﬀences
• Reﬂection on children on the streets, lack of parenting, holding parents responsible
• Understanding Territory Families’ notiﬁcation process and system
• Men’s identity and what type of talk are we leaving behind
• Role of Ambos and the diﬃculty in staying safe attending town camps
• Sexual health and information on getting tested
C4L men's workshops aim to raise awareness around individual ability to manage problems on and
around country, as well as understanding the many service providers available to assist in improving
lives.
DKA's C4L team is currently in Tennant Creek delivering another C4L men's workshop (12-13 April).
For further information about Codes 4 Life, please email info@dka.com.au
[PHOTO L-R:] Senior men from Yuendumu, pictured (L-R): Ned Hargreaves, Baryon Katjara, Elder Warren Williams, Brian
Stirling, Program Manager Michael Liddle, Phillip Alice, John Cavanagh, Bernard Kernan, Sammy Butcher, Lenny Corbett,
Martin Hagen

DFSV PRIMARY PREVENTION PROGRAM
Respected Women Workshops

Under the Northern Territory Government’s Safe, Respected, and Free from Violence grants program,
Desert Knowledge Australia (DKA) received $150K to co-design, facilitate, and develop its primary
prevention project to ‘challenge and change social and cultural attitudes, practices and structures
that underpin domestic, family, and sexual violence’ (DFSV).
Under DKA’s Social Wellbeing Program, which includes Codes 4 Life (for men only), the workshopbased DFSV Respected Women Program is for women only, and aims to:

• Raise awareness about DFSV, its types, its drivers, and the tools we can use to prevent it;
• Educate participants on how to access help, and how to respond to violence when needed;
• Create a safe place where participants can ask questions and share stories;
• Reinstate the authority of Elders using storytelling to teach women experiencing DFSV about
traditional knowledge and practices for preventing and responding to violence; and

• Break the bias that culture justiﬁes violence.
As a collaborative primary prevention project, DKA will be seeking strong partnerships and
involvement from Elders, community members, and relevant organisations.
DKA plans to hold the ﬁrst of its 2023 Respected Women workshops in Kintore, and Utju, each of
which will be developed on community, and in three phases:

• PHASE 1: Co-design the workshop program with Elders and community members.
• PHASE 2: Demonstrate and evaluate the co-designed workshop program.
• PHASE 3: Reﬁne and establish the workshop model from recommendations.
Reporting to the Oﬃce of Domestic, Family and Sexual Violence Reduction, Department of Territory
Families, Housing and Communities, DKA’s Respected Women Program is guided by the following
principles of the Northern Territory’s DFSV Reduction Framework:

• Women and children’s safety and wellbeing is at the centre
• Shared responsibility, partnerships, and local responses
• Evidence and needs-based, and outcomes focused
• Focus on long-term social and cultural change
• Shared awareness and understanding of domestic, family, and sexual violence
For upcoming workshop dates for DKA’s Respected Women Program, please contact Project Manager
Emma Lake by email to: emma.lake@dka.com.au
For further information on DKA’s Social Wellbeing Programs, please contact Program & Business
Manager by email to: info@dka.com.au
For further information about the grants program, please contact the Oﬃce of Domestic, Family and
Sexual Violence Reduction by email to dfv@nt.gov.au

BUSINESS & INNOVATION CENTRE
Attention Event Organisers!
Discover the range of Hire Venues available at Desert Knowledge Precinct!

Increasing venue-hire utilisation of DKA’s Business & Innovation Centre (BIC) has been included
as a component of activation of the Desert Knowledge Precinct (DKP) – proposed as one of the
Short-Term Pillars outlined in DKA’s new Strategic Plan 2023-2025.
As such, marketing of the BIC has commenced in earnest this year with several signiﬁcant bookings

already taking place in the ﬁrst quarter of 2023. Our Corkwood Room hosted the Prime Minister’s
Alice Springs press conference on 24 January, NTG and Lhere Artepe’s Justice Reinvestment
Workshops in February, plus the NT Chamber of Commerce’s Business at Sunset and the PARt
Symposium for International Women’s Day, both in March.
Congress and Central Land Council each booked rooms at the BIC for an entire week in April for
mental health workshops and the Simpson Desert AGM (respectively). NT Neighbourhood Watch also
utilised the Corkwood for its Self-Defense course this April.
Mental Health Association Central Australia's two-day Central Australian Suicide Prevention Forum is
coming up at the BIC on Wednesday & Thursday, 10-11 May 2023.
Comprising a range of room capacities each equipped with AV and video-conferencing, airconditioning, break-out areas, and access to kitchen facilities, the BIC is situated amongst the
Corkwood trees in the heart of the Desert Knowledge Precinct, just a few minutes south of The Gap.
There is ample onsite parking near the BIC as well as the DKP’s Irrarnte Café which is open to the
public from 8am-2pm, and also oﬀers a catering service.
Not-for-proﬁt organisations enjoy a 30% discount on all venue hire bookings at the BIC!
Scan the QR Code below for current BIC Venue Hire rates!

Did you know…?
The location of the Desert Knowledge Precinct is signiﬁcant as it occupies the space where, in the past,
travelling groups or messengers would stop to light smoke signals as a way of requesting passage
through Ntaripe (Heavitree Gap). It was here that Aboriginal Elders and other Mparntwerenye would
meet the travellers to hear their stories, exchange knowledge, or conduct trade negotiations.
As such, today’s Precinct embodies the essence of country, hosting gatherings in a culturally
appropriate space where knowledge is shared and all are welcome.

EDU-TOURISM @ THE PRECINCT
What do you do out there? (You're invited to ﬁnd out!)

Desert Knowledge Precinct tours are available as self-guided for individuals, or half and full day
guided tours for schools and special interest groups of 20-35 people.
Showcasing the important work of the Desert Knowledge Precinct partners, visitors can gain insight
into the 'two-ways' knowledge journeys underway at the Precinct. A full day educational tour caters for
all age groups and learning levels and engages visitors with the living Arrernte culture – the First
Nations people of Mparntwe (Alice Springs) – to discover how Indigenous Knowledge is informing the
development of processes and technologies that progress the sustainability of desert and arid zone
communities, both within Australia and around the world.
If your group's interests are in learning more about Indigenous Culture, Knowledge and Wisdom;
renewable energy systems; satellite technology; adapting for climate change and arid zone
sustainability; then, please consider a full-day educational experience, which includes: two Speaker
Presentations at the BIC, guided tour of the DKA Solar Centre, Batchelor Institute, and the Centre for
Appropriate Technology's Real Time Earth ground station satellite dishes. Cost for the full-day tour
includes breakfast and lunch at the Precinct's Irrarnte Café. Ample bus and car parking onsite.
The Precinct is built on culturally recognised neutral ground and, as such, embodies the essence of the
country on which it stands, promoting knowledge sharing in a place where everyone is welcome.
Desert Knowledge Australia, as manager of the Precinct, works with the people, communities, and
organisations of Central Australia to connect people, knowledge, and opportunities for the beneﬁt
of desert peoples here, and around the world.
BOOK YOUR GROUP TOUR TODAY! info@dka.com.au | (08) 8959 6000
[PHOTO: Lakota Sioux star quilt pattern (rear) and Caterpillar Tracks (front) by Arrernte artist Roseanne Kemarre Ellis
on the two large satellite dishes at CfAT, DKP]

Have a question for the DKA Team? Contact us...
Jimmy Cocking - Chief Executive Oﬃcer
Kate Wiles - Executive Assistant to the CEO
Jeanette Elliot - Corporate Services Manager
Karan Bhuta – Project Manager - Strategy
Nina Kolder - Programs & Business Development Manager
Michael Liddle - Codes 4 Life Manager
Emma Lake - DFSV Project Manager
Micha Bartlett – Codes 4 Life Coordinator
Hannah Farrow - Intyalheme Project Manager
Barb Cliﬀord - Future Grid Communications Oﬃcer
DKA Communications Oﬃcer

Copyright © 2023 Desert Knowledge Australia, All rights reserved.
You are receiving this email because you opted in at our website, www.dka.com.au, or requested to be added to our mailing
list. By subscribing, you'll receive all the latest news from DKA and the Desert Knowledge Precinct.

Our mailing address is:
Desert Knowledge Australia
PO Box 2114
Alice Springs, NT 0871
Australia

Add us to your address book

Want to change how you receive these emails?
You can update your preferences or unsubscribe from this list.

