     Skip to main navigation
     Skip to search
     Skip to main content

Charles Darwin University Home

     Home
     Profiles
     Research Outputs
     Datasets
     Organisational Units
     Student theses
     Projects

Search by expertise, name or affiliation Search...




INFERR-Iron Infusion in Haemodialysis Primary Data
     Sandawana William Majoni (Creator)
     Alan Cass (Creator)

     Higher Degree by Research (HDR) Cohort
     Menzies School of Health Research

Dataset

     Overview
     Research Outputs (1)

Description
End-stage kidney disease (ESKD) rates for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in remote areas are up to 30 times higher than
the national average. Anaemia is a major complication of ESKD and often exacerbated by iron deficiency. It reduces quality of life and is
associated with cardiovascular (CV) events and premature death. Erythropoietin (EPO) is the main agent used to correct anaemia but
requires adequate iron stores to work effectively. Both EPO and IV iron are routine treatment for dialysis patients. Blood tests for ferritin
and transferrin saturation are used to guide iron therapy. Ferritin is low with iron deficiency, but it is raised with ongoing inflammation or
infection. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander dialysis patients have co-existing iron deficiency, high ferritin and ongoing inflammation. In
this setting, there is no evidence to guide the use of IV iron and we do not understand the balance of benefits and harms of this routinely
administered treatment.

The primary outcome is a composite outcome measure with:
1. All-cause death
2. Hospitalisation with a principal diagnosis of all-cause infection

Data Description
• Hospitalisations
• Pathology Results
• Comorbidities/Medical History
• Prescribed medications

This dataset is accessible by application through 'My Health Data Australia' (MyHDA), https://researchdata.edu.au/health
The platform is available to Australian Universities with AAF access.

Please note there may be data sharing restrictions, which will be described in MyHDA and on the trial registry.

Data Custodian and the Principal Investigator contact:

Prof Sandawana William Majoni
william.majoni@menzies.edu.au
  Date made available 2026
                        Menzies School of Health
         Publisher
                        Research
       Date of data
                        15 Aug 2020 - 31 Dec 2025
        production
Geographical coverage Northern Territory, Australia


Contact
     research.outputs@cdu.edu.au
     DOI
     10.25913/5DS2-JN02

Access Dataset
     Clinical Trial registration on ANZCTR

Research output

 Research output per year         2021 2021 2021

     1 Article


     INFERR-Iron infusion in haemodialysis study: INtravenous iron polymaltose for First Nations Australian
     patients with high FERRitin levels on haemodialysis—a protocol for a prospective open-label blinded
     endpoint randomised controlled trial

     Majoni, S. W., Nelson, J., Germaine, D., Hoppo, L., Long, S., Divakaran, S., Turner, B., Graham, J., Cherian, S., Pawar, B.,
     Rathnayake, G., Heron, B., Maple-Brown, L., Batey, R., Morris, P., Davies, J., Fernandes, D., Sundaram, M., Abeyaratne, A., Wong,
     Y. H. S., & 4 othersLawton, P. D., Taylor, S., Barzi, F. & Cass, A., Dec 2021, In: Trials. 22, 1, p. 1-21 21 p., 868.

     Research output: Contribution to journal › Article › peer-review

     Open Access
     File
             Patient 100%

             Randomized Controlled Trial 100%

             Hemodialysis 100%

             Iron 100%

             Infusion 100%
     14 Downloads (Pure)

Cite this
     DataSetCite

Majoni, S. W. (Creator), Cass, A. (Creator) (2026). INFERR-Iron Infusion in Haemodialysis Primary Data. Menzies School of Health
Research. 10.25913/5DS2-JN02


Powered by Pure, Scopus & Elsevier Fingerprint Engine™ © 2023 Elsevier B.V.

We use cookies to help provide and enhance our service and tailor content. By continuing you agree to theuse of cookies




Log in to Pure

About web accessibility

Contact us
