1
In its 5th year, this two-day Symposium is co-hosted by
Batchelor Institute of Indigenous Tertiary Education (BIITE),
Charles Darwin University (CDU) and the Desert Knowledge
Research Institute (DKRI). KIS 2022 aims to showcase a diverse
program of research and knowledge intersections with a focus
on what works and what is good practice across the
communities, landscapes, and businesses of the central
Australian region.




https://www.dka.com.au/activities/dkri/kisv

John Guenther (john.guenther@batchelor.edu.au)

Felicity McLure (felicity.mclure@cdu.edu.au)

Jeanette Elliott (jeanette.elliott@dka.com.au)

Jude Lovell (judith.lovell@batchelor.edu.au)


                                  2
DAY 1




  3
Knowledge Intersection Symposium
            Program
      Function room - Tuesday, 22nd of November 2022

9:00 AM                             Smoking first

9:30 AM         Welcome to Country                         Felicity Hayes

9:55 AM               Dancers                         Simpson Desert Dancers


                                                        Mr William Tilmouth
10:15 AM    Nothing about us without us



                                                      Elaine Peckam & Marlene
10:40 AM   Truth about the NT Intervention
                                                               Hodder


              "...its time we researched           Felicity Hayes, Amunda Gorey &
11:05 AM
                ourselves back to life”                  Callisha Gregg-Rowan


11:30 AM                            MORNING TEA


             Codes 4 Life, an Aboriginal-
11:45 AM    designed-and-led program on            Michael Liddle & John Guenther
                Culture and Identity



12:10 PM

12:35 PM                                   LUNCH


             Global Indigenous language
1:30 PM                                            Vanessa Farrely, Kathryn Gilbey
                       caucus




                                     4
Knowledge Intersection Symposium
            Program
Function room - Tuesday, 22nd of November 2022 (cont.)

          Pertame Masters and Apprentice
1:55 PM                                              Samantha Armstrong
                   conference

                                                   Olivia Nigro, Maureen
2:20 PM        Running Waters Press              Nampijinpa O'Keefe, Marie
                                                          Elena Ellis

2:45 PM             Ngulajuku                           Nyirripi book

3:10 PM                            AFTERNOON TEA

            Kulintja Kutju - Anangu-led
3:30 PM                                          Tanya Luckey & Jason Quin
                 decision-making

                                               Leon Yeatman, Jimmy Cocking,
4:00 PM          KIS Partnership
                                                       Reuben Bolt

                      Poets                          Shirley and Theresa
4:30 PM
            Damper, Tails, Potato & Tea

          Welcome Function to be held in
6:00 PM                                               DKA welcome area
          Business and Innovation Centre

7:30 PM                             Close of Day 1




                                    5
 22 November 2022               Function room                   10:15AM




                 Nothing about us without us
                      Presented by William Tilmouth



A thriving desert needs us to really stop and think about our current systems
of research and services. Our children, families and communities are
researched and assessed on the standards of a culture foreign to us. We will
always be deficient when our cultural strengths are not recognised. Over a
decade of investment in Closing the Gap has failed our people. Generations
of research about us, continually results in prescribed solutions imposed on
us. This speaks to the serious challenges and deficits in research, services
and many mainstream systems. The solution is genuine empowerment of
our people in all services, research and systems about us. It will take
generations to heal before we can feel truly empowered, but it needs to
start now. We must empower our people in designing and leading research
that is used to make decisions about us. Research led by us can lead to
solutions designed by us. Only then will we see change. The wrongs of our
historical and current colonialist research approaches need to inform
systems change for the future to see a thriving desert and Nations. It is time
for us all, together, to disrupt the status quo. And it is possible.




 Organisation:                         CHILDREN’S GROUND

 Field of research:                         First Nations




                                      6
 22 November 2022             Function room                    10:40AM




             Truth about the NT Intervention
          Presented by Marlene Hodder & Elaine Peckham



The Northern Territory Emergency Response (NTER) was a set of racist
policies that the federal government put on all Aboringinal communities and
town camps to control and run Aborignal peoples live's. The false and very
damaging picure of all Aboriginal people was continued with the "Stronger
Futures" legislation in 2012, that the government continued for another 10
years.




 Organisation:                    Intervention Roll Back Group

 Field of research:                  Aboriginal Intervention


                                    7
22 November 2022                   Function room                       11:05AM




 "...its time we researched ourselves back to life”
                                   Presented by

        Felicity Hayes, Amunda Gorey & Callisha Gregg-Rowan


At ‘Ampe-kenhe-Ahelhe’ (Children’s Ground in Central Australia) we are changing the
way services are designed, delivered, and evaluated. For too many years our people
have been the subjects of evaluation and research “our people have been
researched to death. It’s time we researched ourselves back to life” (William
Tilmouth, Children’s Ground Chair). The Children’s Ground Approach is designed by
our First Nations leaders, as our solution – so we can change the future for our
children. It is backing us as the decision-makers. Everyone at Children’s Ground is
involved in our evaluation, we look at the data together – so all our families play a
part in telling the story of how Children’s Ground is going for our children, families,
and communities.

Children’s Ground is a 25-year approach. We are working with our little ones now
and walking with them and our families as they grow. We have evaluation in each
community from the beginning. We are designing our own Arrernte education
curriculum, led by our elders. Early evidence from our longitudinal evaluation
demonstrates that Arrernte children and families who have historically been
systematically excluded from mainstream service systems are actively engaged in
learning, health, employment, social and cultural life.




 Organisation:                              CHILDREN’S GROUND
                                                 First Nations
 Field of research:
                                               Systems Change


                                          8
22 November 2022                   Function room                       11:45AM




     Codes 4 Life, an Aboriginal-designed-and-led
          program on Culture and Identity
              Presented by Michael Liddle & John Guenther

Michael Liddle is an Alyawarre man, and a strong advocate of mental health and
well¬being for Aboriginal men. He is dedicated to the betterment of the community,
specifically in the areas of health and education. Michael has a Diploma in Aboriginal
Studies, and an Associate Diploma in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders
knowledges. Michael founded the program Codes 4 Life (C4L) while employed at
Desert Knowledge Australia.

External evaluation of C4L program was conducted by Chief Investigator John
Guenther, from Bachelor Institute of Indigenous Tertiary Education. The findings
from the evaluation provide insights on the nature of the program, its outcomes,
and its success.

Codes 4 Life program reconnects Aboriginal men with their cultural identity,
community, and responsibilities. It is an Indigenous community-based program
sponsored by the federal government. The program is designed to lead positive
change in men's behaviour, and to increase leadership aspirations and capability.
The workshop-based program aims to create a safe space for men to engage in
meaningful conversations, and to prompt reflection on decisions they made, and on
those they can make in their life. Elders are prominent assets of the program as they
provide cultural authority and share stories.




 Organisation:                       DESERT KNOWLEDGE AUSTRALIA
                               Grass-root community program, Indigenous program,
 Field of research:            Domestic Violence, Aboriginal Health and Well-being

                                          9
DAY 2




 10
 Knowledge Intersection Symposium
             Program
  Corkwood room - Wednesday, 23rd of November 2022

Wednesday Stream One

 9:00 AM                                 Smoking first


 9:30 AM      The AIMhi for Youth Wellbeing App                Kylie Dingwell


              Lifestyle Interventions for Thriving        Nicole Pietsch & Josefina
 9:55 AM
                          Communities                             Olmedo


 10:20 AM               Picturing Heat                         Lisa Stefanoff

 10:45 AM                                MORNING TEA

             Easier access to better primary health      Benxiang Zeng, John Boffa,
 11:10 AM      care for Aboriginal people in Alice        Rachel Walpole, & Emma
                             Springs                              Stubbs


            Exploring health communication equity        Jude Lovell, Louise Clark &
 11:35 AM   in central Australian and other regional
                        health services.
                                                           Ngarla Kunoth-Monks


            RISE SAFELY Framework to improve the
 12:00 PM     birthing outcomes for First Nations                Yvette Roe
            mothers and babies in Central Australia


 12:25 PM                                   LUNCH




                                      11
 Knowledge Intersection Symposium
             Program
Corkwood room – Wednesday, 23rd of November 2022 (cont.)


                Promoting the voice and needs of
 1:30 PM        Aboriginal people in health service           Anthea Brand
                            provision

             Tangentyere Council Land and Learning        Adelaide Church, Brian
 1:55 PM
                  Bilingual Resources Program             Clyne, & Tarna Andrews



               Indigenous knowledges and systemic          Erin Reilly & Michael
 2:20 PM
             change: The path to health and wellbeing            Halloran


 2:45 PM                               AFTERNOON TEA

                                                        Discussion - John Guenther,
                                                        Yvette Roe, & Walbira
3:15:00 PM         Research is not a dirty word!
                                                        Murray (RKM Function
                                                        Centre)
4:45:00 PM                                   CLOSE




                                       12
 23 November 2022                  Corkwood room                       9:30AM




             The AIMhi for Youth Wellbeing App
                         Presented by Kylie Dingwall

The ‘Aboriginal and Islander Mental Health Initiative for Youth’ (AIMhi-Y) is a new co-
designed smartphone based mental health app. It was codesigned with First Nations
young people and elders in the NT to promote wellbeing and resilience. The
strengths-based, storytelling app integrates education and mental health treatment
into a fun, gamified and interactive format. It is a brief, supported, and self-guided
intervention which embeds guidance from elders, building connection with country
and language. It integrates cognitive behavioural therapy and mindfulness-based
activities and promotes conscious choice.

Feasibility testing with 30 young people in Darwin demonstrated that participants
experienced improvements in wellbeing after four weeks of app use. Participants
reported that they found the app easy to use, culturally relevant, and useful. Findings
support earlier research suggesting that digital wellbeing apps that are
appropriately designed with and for the target populations are a feasible and
acceptable means of promoting wellbeing among First Nations young people.

We are currently working with services in Darwin, Alice Springs and Adelaide to tailor
the app to additional regions, codesign supporting resources and implement the
app and supporting resources with First Nations young people.




 Organisation:                      Menzies School of Health Research

 Field of research:                     Mental Health and Wellbeing



                                          13
  23 November 2022                     Corkwood room                           9:55AM




 Lifestyle Interventions for Thriving Communities
              Presented by Nicole Pietsch & Josefina Olmedo


There is an increasing body of evidence that demonstrates lifestyle interventions are an
effective way to support mental health and wellbeing.

The Mental Health Association of Central Australia (MHACA) is a community managed
organisation that provides psychosocial support services, NDIS services, tenancy support,
suicide prevention training and health promotion programs.

MHACA is a signatory to the Equally Well Consensus Statement which asks organisations across
Australia to take action to support the physical health of people with mental health conditions.
People who live with enduring and complex mental health challenges have a reduced life
expectancy of 10-20 years compared to the general population.

More than 60% of MHACA’s participants identify as Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander and
many have chronic health issues. Through the Healthy Bodies Support Healthy Minds Program
MHACA is increasing the health literacy of participants through a focus on exercise, nutrition
and increasing water consumption.

MHACA also has a strong commitment to engaging the broader community around the
importance of healthy lifestyle choices and the integral connection with wellbeing.

Local organisations who provide services to community members are encouraged to
understand the importance of lifestyle interventions and integrate a holistic focus of health
into service delivery.




 Organisation:                   Mental Health Association of Central Australia

 Field of research:                                       Health




                                              14
 23 November 2022                  Corkwood room                       10:20AM




                              Picturing Heat
                          Presented by Lisa Stefanoff


The Menzies School of Health Research 'Air in Alice' project is utilizing infrared (IR)
photography as a citizen climate science methodology for mapping heat and thermal
experience as parameters of health and community well-being in Mparntwe this hot
season.

Participants in this hands-on workshop will have an opportunity to explore this
technology and discuss its potentials in understanding day to day heat exposure in
Alice Springs documenting, measuring, analysing and communicating the potential
health impacts and adaptation challenges of increasing desert heat in the years
ahead.

Participants will need a smartphone and be prepared to download a free app to
activate the cameras. They may also volunteer to continue working with the cameras
after the symposium as part of the project.

Advance registration required. Maximum 12 participants.




 Organisation:                      Menzies School of Health Research

 Field of research:              Environmental Health / Climate Science




                                          15
  23 November 2022                      Corkwood room                           11:10AM




   Easier access to better primary health care for
          Aboriginal people in Alice Springs
                                       Presented by

      Benxiang Zeng, John Boffa, Rachel Walpole & Emma Stubbs


Congress has provided comprehensive primary health care (PHC) for Aboriginal people in
central Australia for more than four decades. Between 2016 and 2018, Congress reformed its
service model in Alice Springs. This included geographically-decentralizing the clinic structure
and reforming the workforce model, to enable smaller, multi-disciplinary teams to service
smaller catchment areas of personally-known clients. These changes aimed to improve quality
and continuity of care, better serve the local community, and improve Aboriginal health
outcomes.

Evaluation of the reforms was recently conducted by Congress in partnership with Menzies
School of Health Research. The mixed-methods evaluation collected perspectives from
Congress clients, staff, Board Members, and stakeholder organisations through interview and
surveys, and analyzed quantitative health service data.

Findings show improved accessibility and continuity of PHC for Aboriginal people in Alice
Springs. Clients have easier access to PHC, increased utilization of multi-disciplinary care, and
better chances to see their preferred care provider.

Key challenges include the impact of workforce shortages under the new model. Findings
highlight the need for strengthened workforce engagement and retention strategies, and for
standard operating processes for consistency of care across sites.

Findings have important implications for the delivery of PHC for Aboriginal people in
remote/regional settings.




 Organisation:                        Central Australian Aboriginal Congress

 Field of research:                                   Public health

                                              16
 23 November 2022                  Corkwood room                      11:35AM




Exploring health communication equity in central
  Australian and other regional health services.
  Presented by Judith Lovell, Louise Clark & Ngarla Kunoth-Monks


In a recent a recent review of regional health service studies and policies, we argued
If health communication interventions were successfully implemented, then health
communication equity would improve.

Health communication has a transformative role to play in dismantling inequities in
regional health services and should be acknowledged as a significant determinant
of health outcomes. In many regional health care settings, the dominant language
and culture of the workplace is different from that of the majority of those who use
the service. This may differ between Aboriginal Community Controlled Health
Organisations (primary health) and regional health services (hospitals).

In the publication we proposed some guiding principles that reflect how and under
what conditions health communication interventions might better enable healthcare
at an individual and service level. These principles are 1) to build trust and respect
by inclusion of an individual patient’s cultural perspective; 2) to enhance concordant
understanding of health information through two-way health literacies and learning;
3) to recognize the entanglement of health communication equity with regional
socio-cultural and health determinants.

Given these principles what would successful health communication interventions
look like, for whom and in what contexts?



 Organisation:                     Graduate School, Batchelor Institute

 Field of research:                   Health Communication Equity

                                         17
 23 November 2022                 Corkwood room                     12:00PM




 RISE SAFELY Framework to improve the birthing
outcomes for First Nations mothers and babies in
                Central Australia
           Presented by Yvette Roe, Sue Kildea & Sue Kruske


Today, First Nations women, babies and families experience profound health
inequities when comparing health outcomes to other Australians. A
disproportionate number of First Nations women experience adverse outcomes in
pregnancy and birth, and these often have lifelong consequences. For the past 10–
15 years, there has been little or no improvement in many perinatal indicators.



The RISE SAFELY translation framework informs our research as it embeds First
Nations values and knowledges while we dismantle the system structural barriers to
address health inequities. The framework has four key pillars: Redesigning and
evaluating health systems and services; Investing in the health and research
workforce; Strengthening family capacity; and Embedding community engagement,
governance, and control.



Our presentation will share the learnings from a metropolitan site that reported a
37% reduction in preterm births for First Nations births and how those learning can
be customised to the unique Central Australian setting.



 Organisation:                  Central Australian Aboriginal Congress

 Field of research:                            Public health


                                        18
23 November 2022                   Corkwood room                      1:30PM




    Promoting the voice and needs of Aboriginal
        people in health service provision
                         Presented by Anthea Brand


The cultural interface, as described by Martin Nakata, is a hybrid space where people
from different cultural groups meet and collaborate to develop new knowledge,
shared understandings and novel solutions. Impacts of colonisation mean that the
voice of Aboriginal people is often marginalised in the literature and in health care
decision making. Locating interactions between patients and health professionals at
the cultural interface provides an opportunity to integrate knowledge and practices
of both groups so that both-ways approaches that incorporate Aboriginal
knowledge, values and practices can be developed.

This presentation will discuss findings from research conducted with Aboriginal
caregivers living in a remote Central Australian community and the health
professionals employed by a government health service to work with these
caregivers to improve child health and nutrition. Findings indicate that health
professionals are ill-equipped and unsupported to work at the cultural interface.
Undergraduate training can better prepare heath professionals to work in culturally
safe ways that consider, respect and integrate other ways of knowing and doing.
Reorientation of health services is also needed to facilitate culturally safe practice
and holistic models of care.




 Organisation:              Flinders University, Rural and Remote Health NT

 Field of research:                 Primary health care, cultural safety



                                         19
23 November 2022                   Corkwood room                      1:55PM




Tangentyere Council Land and Learning Bilingual
             Resources Program
    Presented by Adelaide Church, Brian Clyne & Tarna Andrews


Tangentyere Council’s Land and Learning Program has been working for 24 years to
promote and facilitate Two-Way science and on-country learning in remote
Indigenous community schools in Central Australia. The program works with elders,
school staff and students, local ranger groups and other experts to plan and carry
out bush activities, based on Indigenous Ecological Knowledge and Western science
linked to this knowledge. We document activities and create bilingual resources
developed collaboratively with community members and school staff. The program
supports learning and cultural wellbeing activities in Alice Springs town camps,
promoting connection to culture, intergenerational transfer, school attendance, all
improving strength and confidence.

Over 200 books have been produced on topics ranging from feral animals, waterhole
care, bush food and medicine, tool making, astronomy, mapping, endangered
species, connection to ceremony, climate change etc. plus an extensive suite of Plant
and Animal learning cards in 5 different Central Australian Languages which are
widely used in schools around the region. Recently the program has been funded by
the Traditional owners of Uluru, focussing on supporting and facilitating ecological
and cultural learning activities with Pitjantjatjara schools and producing beautiful
bilingual resources.



 Organisation:                             Tangentyere Council
                             Two-Way science and on-country learning in
 Field of research:        remote Indigenous community schools in central
                                             Australia.


                                         20
23 November 2022                Corkwood room                    2:20PM




Indigenous knowledges and systemic change: The
         path to health and wellbeing
              Presented by Erin Reilly & Michael Halloran


The knowledge systems and worldviews of Indigenous and Torres Strait
Islander peoples are distinct ways of thinking, being and acting in the world
that have been effective for thousands of years. Yet, the colonial project has
imposed foreign Western values and ideas on Aboriginal people that have
proved to be detrimental to their social, economic, and physical wellbeing.
Government policy eras of protection, assimilation, and ‘normalisation’ have
clearly failed to address intergenerational trauma and the alarmingly high
rates of ill health, incarceration, and suicide suffered by Indigenous peoples.
We argue that the way forward is about adopting principles that reframe
relations between governments and Indigenous peoples where systemic
change and Indigenous knowledge systems and self-determination are the
only priority in policy and practice rather than the State continually framing
Indigenous people as a ‘problem to be solved’. The suicide postvention and
after care model of Thirrili provides a case example of how such principles
can be effectively implemented.




 Organisation:                                Thirrili Ltd

 Field of research:            Indigenous knowledges and wellbeing




                                      21
23 November 2022               Corkwood room                  3:15PM




                 Research is not a dirty word!
                              Presented by

John Guenther, Walbira Murray & Yvette Roe (RKM Function Centre)


With the tune of the old Skyhooks song running in the background, we want
to explore the refrain that Research! is not a dirty word. Don't you believe
what you've seen, or you've heard. Drawing from the critiques that research
in remote communities is somehow ‘dirty’ we hear that ‘Indigenous people
are the most over-researched people in the world’; that research is a
colonial instrument of power and control; that for all the benefits that
accrue to researchers and their careers, people in communities don’t
benefit; and that the voices of people in communities don’t get heard amidst
all the ‘evidence’ that is generated from research. In some contexts, these
may be fair criticism, but we also want to explore, and to put forward
counterpoints that add the notion of the value of ethical research and its
usefulness for communities, and to a thriving desert. We hope to hold a
robust discussion towards better understanding how ethical and respectful
research assists knowledge intersections; or where research needs to be
undertaken in specific cohorts or contexts, or within specific cultural
systems. Remembering, that “if you got research, you better keep it in good
shape”.




                            Batchelor Institute Of Indigenous Tertiary
 Organisation:
                                            Education
 Field of research:                         Research


                                    22
 Knowledge Intersection Symposium
             Program
Knowledge Seminar - Wednesday, 23rd of November 2022

Wednesday Stream Two
9:00 AM                                  Smoking first

             Determining a direction for Local
                                                       Emma Browne, John Guenther,
             Decision Making in four Warlpiri
                                                        Sam Osborne, Glenda Wayne,
 9:30        Schools: a collaborative research
                                                      Gretel Macdonald, Elaine Williams,
 AM       project between the Warlpiri Education
                                                       Aysia Rodgers, Andrew Ross, Joe
          Training Trust, Batchelor Institute, and
                                                          Brown, & Barbara Martin
             the NT Department of Education
                                                           Vanessa Davis, Carmel
 9:55
                 The Little Kids' Word List           O'Shannessy, Denise Foster, Jessie
 AM
                                                           Bartlett, & Alice Nelson

           International research and bilingual        Sam Osborne, Kathleen Heugh,
10:20
          education: considerations for Anangu        Nyunmiti Burton, Jennifer Ingkatji,
 AM
                communities and schools                       & Rhoda Tjitayi

10:45
                                        MORNING TEA
 AM

            Inkamala: Lets Sing! A partnership
11:10       approach to producing high quality         Sam Osborne, Jennifer Ingkatji,
 AM            first language resources for           Nyunmiti Burton, & Rhoda Tjitayi
                Anangu/Yarnangu schools

                                                         Jeff Hulcombe, Monica Nangala
11:35
              Closing The Gap, Yanangu Way.               Robinson, & Linda Nakamarra
 AM
                                                                     Allen.
          Telling the money story: learnings from
12:00
             a study of First Nations’ financial                  Ellie Norris
 PM
                         reporting
12:25
                                              LUNCH
 PM




                                         23
Knowledge Intersection Symposium
            Program
Knowledge Seminar - Wednesday, 23rd of November 2022 (Cont.)

       Go-Pros, Polaroids, Paint and Vignettes:
1:30
           Vantage points in collaborative                Catherine Holmes
PM
                      research

            Can we really say - no your not
1:55
         welcome? seeing Mparntwe sacred              Lucy Stewart & Doris Stuart
PM
         sites through arts coloured glasses


                                                    Judith Lovell, Ruth Katakarinja,
2:20   Pathways: Communication as creative         Ruby Kunoth-Monks, Kathy Smith,
PM           skill + cultural expertise             Victoria Cruell, Aisha Harper &
                                                          Brittaney Smothers

2:45
                                    AFTERNOON TEA
PM
3:15
PM
4:45
                                           CLOSE
PM




                                      24
23 November 2022                Knowledge Seminar                9:30AM



Determining a direction for Local Decision Making in four
Warlpiri Schools: a collaborative research project between
 the Warlpiri Education Training Trust (WETT), Batchelor
     Institute and the NT Department of Education
                                Presented by

 John Guenther, Sam Osborne, Glenda Wayne, Gretel Macdonald, Emma
  Browne, Robyn Ober, Elaine Williams, Aysia Rodgers, Andrew Ross, Joe
                       Brown & Barbara Martin


The Northern Territory Government has a policy of local decision making
which extends to governance of schools. Over a number of years, the
Warlpiri Education and Training Trust Advisory Committee (WETT AC) has
advocated to the Department of Education for strengthened community-led
schools in order to support bilingual and bicultural education outcomes.

This presentation describes a collaboration between the WETT AC, the
Central Land Council, the NT Department of Education and Batchelor
Institute to consult with community members across four Warlpiri
communities to gain insights and determine a direction for Local Decision
Making in their schools that can deliver on their vision for strong educational
governance into the future. The project involved consultations with
community members in Nyirrpi, Willowra, Yuendumu and Lajamanu in
2021, and planning for a Regional Forum in Alice Springs in 2023.



 Organisation:                          Central Land Council
                             Educational Governance and local decision
 Field of research:
                                             making
                                      25
23 November 2022               Knowledge Seminar              9:55AM




                   The Little Kids' Word List
                               Presented by

         Vanessa Davis, Carmel O'Shannessy, Denise Foster,

                      Jessie Bartlett, & Alice Nelson


Children learn the words that people say to them. When health or education
professionals

and families want to talk about children's language development, it helps if
they know

which words children hear regularly, because these are the words the
children are learning.

In this project we developed the Little Kids' Word List, for Eastern and
Central Arrernte, Western Arrarnta, Warlpiri and English. The Little Kids'
Word List is an online app. Parents and grandarents can hear a word spoken
and click on whether their child understands or says the word. The spoken
word list counts the words children know. In the talk we explain our
methods and show how the app is used.




 Organisation:                 Tangentyere Council Research Hub

 Field of research:            Aboriginal languages and linguistics




                                    26
23 November 2022                       Knowledge Seminar                       10:20AM



      International research and bilingual education:
    considerations for Anangu communities and schools
                                       Presented by

             Kathleen Heugh, Sam Osborne, Nyunmiti Burton,

                         Jennifer Ingkatji, & Rhoda Tjitayi

In South Australia, the 10-year Aboriginal Education strategy (2019-2029) outlines a focus on
bilingual education and culturally responsive pedagogies (CRP). This paper draws on findings
from longitudinal studies conducted in Africa, South America, South and South East Asia on
bilingual education. The focus is on First Nations and Indigenous communities, particularly
those living in remote and rural contexts, and small settlements.

The first principle of successful education, including bilingual education, is that students can
only learn what they understand. The second is that family and community participation in and
support for school learning is necessary for meaningful and sustainable schooling. Thirdly,
educators need to be trusted to consult the community carefully and to interpret the
curriculum in ways that best suit the community context, a finding that is neatly encapsulated
within the key principles of CRP. We draw attention to how students develop literacy in first
language, how they develop biliteracy in first language and English, and what this means for
teachers and Anangu educators.

This paper is a collaboration between UniSA and Anangu educators to respond to the research-
informed implications of the international research, and centre Anangu agency and ‘linguistic
citizenship’ in framing language education choices for children in Anangu schools.




 Organisation:                              University of South Australia

 Field of research:                                     Education




                                              27
23 November 2022                       Knowledge Seminar                      11:10AM



Inkamala: Lets Sing! A partnership approach to producing
       high quality first language resources for
               Anangu/Yarnangu schools

     Presented by Jennifer Ingkatji, Nyunmiti Burton, Rhoda Tjitayi


Music has long been an integral part of classrooms for learning language and important
educational concepts. Likewise, song is essential to knowledge acquisition and
intergenerational sharing in Anangu/Yarnangu (Pitjantjatjara, Ngaanyatjarra, Yankunytjatjara)
life.

The University of South Australia has a partnership agreement with Iwiri Aboriginal
Corporation, a member-based corporation for Anangu who live in Adelaide with a focus on
strengthening the community through the lenses of the arts, language, knowledge, culture, and
community. Through this partnership, high quality first language projects including teaching
the language(s), education first language resource production, and translation work. Iwiri also
has a first language choir and teaches children traditional dance (inma).

Most recently, the partnership is developing an app that makes high quality first language
music available free to Anangu schools and communities for access via mobile devices. This
enables any teacher or community member to become a music and first language teacher. This
multimedia resource brings together key educational methods such as repetition, reading,
conceptual development, collaboration with peers, and all of the benefits that singing together
brings in terms of social and emotional wellbeing. Elements of the project and the app will be
shared and be aware; this session may even involve some singing!




 Organisation:                              University of South Australia

 Field of research:                                    Education




                                             28
23 November 2022                   Knowledge Seminar                  11:35AM



                   Closing The Gap, Yanangu Way.
                                   Presented by

 Jeff Hulcombe, Monica Nangala Robinson, Linda Nakamarra Allen.

Last year we presented to this symposium how the Purple House evolved from an
extended history of Yanangu Community Based Research, and how the Purple
House, in adopting and responding to Yanangu values has not only manged to close
the gap but open a gap upon the rest of Australia in the survival rates of renal
patients.

This year our presentation will further illuminate the philosophical and intellectual
understandings that underlie this Yanangu approach to addressing their health and
wellbeing requirements and equate it to national aspirations of reconciliation and
close the gap.

This will be undertaken through a study of Yanangu symbolism, which articulate
their concept of health and well-being and the nature of negative impacts upon this.
Beneath this symbolism lies the intellectual and philosophical understanding of
Yanangu which have enabled their survival over eons within the harshest of
conditions.

This symbolism has practical effect for Yanangu and indicates the structural change
they are seeking in the relationship with colonial Australia to achieve the outcomes
that not only they require but also what ostensibly this nation seeks to achieve.



                            Western Desert Nganampa Walytja Palyantjaku
 Organisation:
                                   Tjutaku Aboriginal Corporation.
 Field of research:                                Health



                                         29
23 November 2022                        Knowledge Seminar                        12:00PM



  Telling the money story: learnings from a study of First
                Nations’ financial reporting
                                 Presented by Ellie Norris

Thriving Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander corporations are vital to the cultural and social
fabric of the communities they represent. The communication of financial information is
considered a key aspect of corporate governance from a Western perspective. However, past
research has identified that measures of financial performance developed in one cultural
context may not easily translate to another.

This research project examines the experiences with financial reporting amongst managers
and directors of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander organisations. The purpose of this study
is to explore the ways in which the reporting process may support or undermine the activities
of community-controlled entities.

Qualitative interviews with 20 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander corporations and 8
stakeholder groups were conducted for this study. In addition, the reporting practices of a
sample of 100 ORIC and ACNC registered entities have been examined.

The study’s findings suggest that financial reporting can be positive, distracting or even harmful
depending on how this information is used and who is responsible for defining report contents.
These findings indicate the performativity of the reporting process; that it is not a value neutral
activity but can impact on the ways in which Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander corporations
are able to conduct their important work.

The outcomes of this project offer implications for practitioners and policy makers to ensure
the transparent communication of decision-useful financial information, targeted at the
priorities of report users.




 Organisation:                                 Charles Darwin University

 Field of research:                                      Accounting




                                               30
23 November 2022               Knowledge Seminar               1:30PM




 Go-Pros, Polaroids, Paint and Vignettes: Vantage
         points in collaborative research
                      Presented by Catherine Holmes


What does collaborative and synergetic research look like in the
contemporary desert context? This presentation will explore some practical
approaches to child-and family-focused research in remote Australian First
Nations settings. Some methods that will be discussed are the central role
of Community-Based Research Collaborators (CBRCs), the inclusion of visual
ethnographic influences like Go-Pro-style cameras, polaroids or illustrations
and the power of short-story style vignettes. Such approaches illustrate
multiple vantage points that enrich and enhance research. The Australian
Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies (AIATSIS) Code of
Ethics for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Research (2020) and ‘United
Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples’ (UNDRIP)
underpins the discussion.




 Organisation:                                 ANU

 Field of research:                 Enthography of Childhood




                                     31
23 November 2022                    Knowledge Seminar                   1:55PM



     Can we really say - no your not welcome? seeing
    Mparntwe sacred sites through arts coloured glasses
                   Presented by Doris Stuart & Lucy Stewart


Welcome to Country – it sounds easy doesn’t it? You acknowledge the authority of
registered Native Title Holders, such as myself. I greet you all, and I welcome you all
in response and we all feel good. But in truth it’s a little more complicated than that.
Just a few years ago my sister and I had a long discussion with friends from the Alice
Springs art community about this very issue of Welcome to Country’ over a BBQ.
When I was a child, not so long ago, and for all the time before that, people couldn’t
just walk into Mparntwe uninvited. They had to sit down at certain boundaries,
places such as Ntarpie (Heavytree Gap). The gap as you all know it – they had to sit
down and ask permission of Apmereke Artweye to enter Mparntwe, and they knew
they might be told they weren’t welcome. My sister and I explained that these
‘welcomes’ didn’t feel reasonable to us because the truth was that if you knock we
are simply expected to open our door and say welcome. It’s a ritual that doesn’t
always make us feel respected… it doesn’t necessarily leave us feeling like our voices
have been herd. Can we actually so, no your not welcome? We can’t … you are here
already, you have walked through the door and moved the furniture around. The
one thing we all agreed on was that Acknowledgment to country would feel more
appropriate. (Doris Stuart Kngwarreye)




 Organisation:                            Charles Darwin University

 Field of research:                          Arts / Social Sciences




                                          32
23 November 2022                        Knowledge Seminar                       2:20PM




     Pathways: Communication as creative skill +
                 cultural expertise
                                       Presented by

Ruth Katakarinja, Ruby Kunoth-Monks, Victoria Cruell, Judith Lovell & Kathy
                                Smith

In this project we continue to experiment with pathways in creative careers in central Australia,
building on the initial research findings of 2020. We are in the early phase of a collaborative
mentoring project between peoples of diverse cultural backgrounds and linked between the
Batchelor Institute and the University of Southern California’s Expanded Animation: Research
+ Practice SCA247. This initiative is supported by collaborations grant for USC mentors, and an
emerging vocation skill set qualification for BI related participants. The combination of these
plus informal mentoring is a response to the gulf between digital practice, employment and
entrepreneurial pathways, and the obvious affordances that are enabled by the cross-over of
creative skills, technologies language, culture, and brilliance.

This initiative aims to keep testing and addressing skills acquisition and practices that can
support adequate, appropriate, and innovative communication responses in central and other
regional Australian contexts. In this sense we look to business and entrepreneurship as vital
partners to enable linguistic and cultural affordances to connect, create and innovate. Best
described as a loose configuration of alliances, we aim to explore digital capacities that enable
communicators whose role may include the transformative culture-maker, cultural keeper,
maker of appropriate health, education, or judicial information. In exploring a wrap-around of
formal, entrepreneurial and workplace applications we also want to [re] educate practitioners,
policy makers and employers as to the potentials of role, value, and necessity in welcoming
strong diverse digital communicators into any service, organisation, or network.




 Organisation:                         Graduate School, Batchelor Institute

 Field of research:                 Communication Expertise and Innovation



                                              33
 Knowledge Intersection Symposium
             Program
   Function room - Wednesday, 23rd of November 2022
Wednesday Stream Three

9:00 AM                                            Smoking first


9:30 AM      A Tour Through the Geology of the Amadeus Basin          Charles Verdel


                The energy transition in the bush - Imagining
9:55 AM               socially engaged energy systems
                                                                        Anna Cain



             Spatial planning for sustainable utility-scale solar
10:20 AM        and wind energy in the Northern Territory
                                                                      Billee McGinley



10:45 AM                                          MORNING TEA


11:15 AM     The Lake Eyre Basin Intergovernmental Agreement          Steve Morton

                Saving water resources in the face of climate
11:35 AM      change for posterity in the Northern Territory: A        Charles Baah
                          household perspective

             Entangled in the clutches of illusive employment…
12:00 PM                    a missed opportunity
                                                                      Rajesh Koppula


12:25 PM                                              LUNCH


             If you build it, they will come: Creating a centre for
1:30 PM                   evidence-based healthcare
                                                                       Sonia Hines




                                                34
Knowledge Intersection Symposium
            Program
 Function room - Wednesday, 23rd of November 2022 (Cont.)



1:55 PM          Very Remote Health Experience              John Wright & Pene Curtis




             “I don’t think it’s on anyone’s radar”: The
          workforce and system barriers to healthcare for
2:20 PM     Indigenous women following a head injury
                                                            Michelle Fitts & Elaine Wills
           acquired through violence in remote Australia



2:45 PM                                   AFTERNOON TEA


3:15 PM

4:45 PM                                        CLOSE




                                         35
23 November 2022               Function room                   9:30AM



     A Tour Through the Geology of the Amadeus Basin
                       Presented by Charles Verdel


From a geological perspective, the Desert Knowledge Precinct is located
within the Amadeus Basin, a series of faulted and folded sedimentary rock
layers that were deposited from about 1 billion to 350 million years ago.
These rocks record the deep-time history of central Australia, and they also
have practical uses that are important for maintaining many activities across
the region. Projects conducted in the Amadeus Basin by the Northern
Territory Geological Survey are aimed at refining our knowledge of the
sequence of rock layers within the basin, their geometries, and their ages.
Results from these projects have implications for unravelling the geological
history of central Australia, as well as for mapping out regions of potential
natural resources. In this presentation I will discuss the basic geological
framework of the Amadeus Basin, some of the major resources of the basin,
as well some of the fascinating parts of Earth history recorded in Amadeus
Basin rocks that we can look at with our own eyes.




 Organisation:                 Graduate School, Batchelor Institute

 Field of research:         Communication Expertise and Innovation




                                     36
23 November 2022               Function room                    10:20AM



  Spatial planning for sustainable utility-scale solar and
          wind energy in the Northern Territory

                      Presented by Billee McGinley
As the world necessarily transitions to renewable energy, utility-scale solar
and wind developments are rapidly increasing. The central Australian region
of the Northern Territory (NT) have already been earmarked for centralised
energy systems to provide large amounts of sustained power for green
hydrogen production plants for export of renewable energy in the global
market. Inland utility-scale solar and wind energy developments can
consume large areas of intact habitats. To ensure sustainable development
of this new energy sprawl, regional scale planning with a multi-disciplinary
approach that puts development within a conservation strategy is required.
This research will use Geographic Information Systems (GIS) to formulate a
spatially enabled Multi-Criteria Evaluation (MCE) framework, to identify land
for sustainable development of onshore utility-scale solar and wind energy.
MCE is commonly used for decisions with a spatial element, where multiple
factors need to be considered. With appropriate spatial planning, central
Australia can not only fulfil opportunities in the renewable energy market,
but also provide important environmental services. This presentation will
give an overview of past spatial conservation planning in the central
Australian region of the NT and discuss knowledge gaps for conservation of
biodiversity in the context of expanding utility-scale solar and wind
developments.



 Organisation:                      Charles Darwin University

 Field of research:                  Sustainable development

                                     37
23 November 2022              Function room                  11:10AM




   The Lake Eyre Basin Intergovernmental
                 Agreement
                      Presented by Steve Morton



The Lake Eyre Basin is one of the last catchments around the globe to flow
without interruption. Its communities and governments have committed to
collaborative, cross-border management, aiming at maintenance of its
values. Cross-border collaboration is embodied in the Lake Eyre Basin
Intergovernmental Agreement established between the Australian,
Queensland and South Australian governments in 2000, and subsequently
joined by the Northern Territory in 2004. The presentation will summarise
activities currently undertaken under the umbrella of the Agreement,
including community and scientific advisory groups, development of a draft
Strategic Plan, a monitoring and evaluation framework, the Aboriginal Way
map, and the Justin Costelloe scholarship.




 Organisation:                           Independent

 Field of research:                  Environmental science




                                   38
23 November 2022                    Function room                       11:35AM




   Saving water resources in the face of climate
 change for posterity in the Northern Territory: A
             household perspective
                         Presented by Charles Baah


The need to shift from supply-sided water conservation approaches to demand-
sided ones has never been more prominent. News circulating on intensive droughts
in major European cities, melting glaciers in North America, and flash floods in Asian
countries attest to the escalating effects of climate change on freshwater resources.
Although household water conservation is gaining ascendency as the ideal strategy
for water management, the decisions and behavior factors guiding household water
consumption are frequently changing and complex due to contextual differences in
habits, values, infrastructures, policies, and pricing. Considering the depleting nature
of water resources in the Darwin and Alice Springs regions, as reported by the
Australian Bureau of Statistics, this study employs an embedded mixed-method
research design to achieve the following objectives: 1) explore water scarcity
perceptions in Darwin and Alice Springs; 2) examine how household norms influence
water conservation intentions; and 3) investigate if an integrated model of the theory
of planned behavior, value belief norm, and protection motivation theory better
explain water conservation behavior intentions than individual models. This study
has theoretical and practical implications for scholars and policymakers.




 Organisation:                            Charles Darwin University

 Field of research:                              Management



                                          39
23 November 2022                              Function room                                  12:00PM



 ENTANGLED IN THE CLUTCHES OF ILLUSIVE EMPLOYMENT… A MISSED
                        OPPORTUNITY

                                  Presented by Rajesh Koppula
History demonstrates that Aboriginal people have actively participated and conducted and maintained trade
with neighbouring countries, such as Afghanistan in the West, Malaya in the North, and Pacific Oceania
Islands to the east of Australia.

This research examines these labour markets from the perspective of edcuation and training on the basis of
survey data collected from Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders living in 21 remote communities by Central
Australia for the Cooperative Research Centre for Remote Economic Participation's Population Mobility.
Examining access to education, employment opportunity and other structural factors, it was quite evident
that the reality of economic engagement in these communities is far removed from the functioning of
mainstream labour markets. The assumptions about, or lack of distinction between remote and urban
locations, have contributed to misunderstanding of the assets and capabilities remote communities have,
and aspire to develop in future.

Experience gained over the years, by conducting several Pre-Training Assessments as part of researcher’s
previous roles in education, training and employment, clearly elicite that there is an accepted level of illusion
among the Aboriginal Remote Community members that Community Development Programs (CDP) is a real
employment, while that’s not the case in the real life.

The definition of employment in simple terms is - the state of having a paid work. This is being elaborated,
as such that the international concept of employment is based on the principle that a person must have
been engaged in some economic activity (work) over a short reference period(Thirteenth ICLS 1982).

To achieve the employment one has to take advantage of education and training as there are“…different
aspects of the right to education; the right to universal literacy, to preservation of language and culture, to
political education, to education for multicultural understanding, to technical and vocational education, and
to education to meet special needs on a lifelong basis…” Therefore education should be considered as a
window of opportunities.




 Organisation:                                                   Groupinco

 Field of research:                                 Education and Employment




                                                      40
23 November 2022                     Function room                         1:30PM



     If you build it, they will come: Creating a centre for
          evidence-based healthcare in Alice Springs
                            Presented by Dr Sonia Hines

In 2022, the Mparntwe Centre for Evidence in Health (MCEH) became a JBI (Joanna
Briggs Institute) Centre of Excellence. In the four years since its inception in 2018 as
a JBI affiliated centre, MCEH has grown to become a hub for evidence-based
healthcare with a strong basis in remote and Indigenous health, but also a large
network of national and international collaborators conducting systematic reviews
on a wide variety of topics and in a range of methodologies.



Professional development is a well-known factor in health staff retention for rural
and remote areas. As well as training in systematic review methods, and assistance
with conducting reviews, MCEH offers a range of research methods education
activities available to all interested parties in Alice Springs. Since 2020, 346 clinicians,
students, researchers and potential researchers have attended more than 20
research education events with us on topics such as introductory statistics, action
research methods, clinical audit and writing for publication.



This presentation will discuss how MCEH evolved from an idea to a thriving reality,
providing in-person professional development and research opportunities for
health professionals in central Australia and important links to international
research networks.




 Organisation:                       Flinders Rural and Remote Health, NT

 Field of research:                                     Health


                                            41
23 November 2022                   Function room                       1:55PM




                Very Remote Health Experience
                    Presented by John Wright & Pene Curtis



Very Remote Health Experience

The Very Remote Health Experience (VRHE) is an immersive experience for first-year
nursing and other health students to gain insight into living and working in a remote
community. Students who have either lived experience or clinical placement
experience in remote areas are more likely to work in these areas after graduation.
Therefore, our goal is to encourage health students to consider clinical placements
in the NT and ultimately to work in remote NT after graduation.

The experience is based in Tennant Creek in the Barkly region of the NT and includes
site visits to health facilities and community features, cultural training, interactive
learning activities, and a strong focus on reflection and self-development.

In late 2021, the VRHE hosted a group of 11 first-year nursing students in the
inaugural week-long program. Feedback was overwhelmingly positive, and so far 9
of the 11 participants have come back to the NT on clinical placements, many of
them to Tennant Creek. The July 2022 cohort saw 12 health students attend, of which
2 have so far enrolled for NT clinical placements. This presentation will describe the
program, its successes as a workforce recruitment strategy and plans for the future.




 Organisation:                              Flinders University NT

 Field of research:                            Health students



                                          42
23 November 2022                   Function room                      2:20PM




     “I don’t think it’s on anyone’s radar”: The
 workforce and system barriers to healthcare for
    Indigenous women following a head injury
  acquired through violence in remote Australia
                   Presented by Michelle Fitts & Elaine Wills

Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women experience high rates of head injuries
as a result of violence. This study explored the workforce barriers that affect access
to healthcare and assessment for a potential traumatic brain injury for Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander women as an outcome of family violence in one remote
region in the Northern Territory. Between January and July 2022, semi-structured
interviews and discussion groups were conducted with 38 professionals from health,
housing and disability services as well as specialised family violence and legal
services in central Australia. Interviews and discussion groups were audiotaped and
transcribed verbatim. Transcripts were analysed using thematic analysis. Various
workforce barriers prevent pre-screening and assessment including limited access
to specialist neuropsychology services and stable remote primary health care
professionals with remote expertise. There were also low levels of training and
knowledge among community-based service providers regarding the signs of head
injury.

Needs-based investment in the primary healthcare and specialist service systems
together with professional training on head injury would benefit how systems in
remote areas respond through a more integrated approach to support women
following family violence.



 Organisation:                          Western Sydney University

 Field of research:                Head injury and violence; Workforce


                                         43
